From Buzuluk...

Part 1/2 of the "Birth of the Battalion" minicampaign.

*****

The 1st Czechoslovak Independent Field Battalion was officially found on 12th February 1942. It was made of Czechoslovak soldiers that fought during the Polish campaign in September 1939, and that fell into Soviet captivity. Although many of them left for France or Middle East, others had remained and they passed through several internmet camps; final one was in Buzuluk. Once the establishment of independent Czechoslovak army formation was approved by the Soviet officials, those men were joined by the former Czechoslovak citizens relased from Soviet prisons and concentration camps; together they formed the battalion. They were equipped and trained by the Soviets. This scenario is one of such training missions. You'll be guided by Soviet instructors as usual, but this time you'll also train with young Soviet recruits.

Intelligence and reconnaisance:
Battalion will split for the forenoon training.
- group "Brooms" (2nd and 3rd infantry companies): obstacles training with Soviet instructors.
- group "Iron" (1st infantry company, MG company, snipers): shooting training, then explosives and pyrotechnics course under the guidance of Soviet engineers.

Then a joint exercise with Soviet recruits will start. Soviet comrades play the role of a defender during the aternoon practise, so they'll use the morning hours to dig themselves. We don't know where they plan to hide, and thus cannot prepare ideally, but our instructors will help us.
The "enemy" forces are made of an infantry battalion supported by few obsolete light tanks. Those can't be used for anything else than an anti-tank training, but be careful still. Tankmen may overwatch you and we've had a mortal accident not long ago, when one Soviet recruit was trampled over by the speeding vehicle.

Reinforces: None.

Hint: You'll notice that there are no enemy flags. We're far from the Soviet-German front, and the Soviet comrades are exactly that - comrades, not enemies.
So, what to do? Destroy the initial MSU around your starting positions, and once the Soviet "enemy" battalion shows up, approach its area and fight them like you'd fight any real enemy. Don't be afraid, this isn't live fire exercise, and all the fallen will rise after midnight...

Note: One unit represents a company.

Victory conditions: Destroy all enemy units marked as MSU, or recapture the lost VH.