Good morning, Feldmarschall. Seems High Command has taken a liking to you... They have decided to cover you with gifts. Where do I start? Well, you get another, brand new airplane carrier: The battleship H39, in construction for 5 years now, was cancelled and transformed into a carrier. A big carrier, which will greatly enhance your air force. Of course a carrier is worthless without planes, so we filled her with modern airplanes, and gave them experienced pilots.
High Command has also decided to transfer an escort ship to your fleet. Your carrier group is quite vulnerable to airplane attack, so a fleet escort with good AA capacity will help you keep them safe. And you get a reconnaissance cruiser, a fast, strong ship to scout ahead your taskforce.
Your fleet is starting to pack some serious punch, doesn't it.

Last but not least, you have been given the great honor of attacking the USA all on your own!

No, I'm not joking. Our allies the Japanese seem to have bitten more than they can chew, and have asked us to open a second front to give them time to regroup. We don't have any plans to invade the USA (yet), we're lacking the resources for that, but the Americans don't need to know that.
It is imperative that we relieve our allies the Japanese , because without them the Americans will be able to focus on us, and we definitely don't want that. So you will attack and destroy an important naval base somewhere in the northern USA. I think they call the region "Maine" or some such, but it's not of any importance. What *is* important, is that the USA withdraws resources from the Pacific theatre to protect its eastern coast.

Yes, yes. I know it is winter, and the seas are stormy, but our allies can't wait till spring, they need that diversion now. Don't worry, the weather might be bad, but the mission itself will be easy and without danger: The totality of the US fleet (and the quasi-totality of their army) is in the Pacific, leaving their mainland completely unprotected. Also there is some law prohibiting them from deploying their own troops in their homeland, the fools. They only have some reserve force protecting them, which means you'll face a handfull of untrained peasants through which our battle-hardened verterans will tear like a knife through butter...

Prepare your force and go get them! In a couple months, in spring, we will strike again, elsewhere, to keep the Americans on their toes: Any American ship looking for us is a ship our allies won't need to worry about, so make sure your attack doesn't go unnoticed. High Command has decided the battleship Tirpitz is to accompany you, to provide fire support. Whatever you do, don't lose her.



Instructions: Destroy the American MSUs. You get a new carrier, 4 planes, a fleet escort ship which can provide air cover for your ships, and a fast recon cruiser. You also get temporarily the battleship Tirpitz, but don't let her come to harm!