We have to admit that attacking the Americans in their homeland was a bad idea.
On the other hand our allies the Japanese are desperate, the Americans are at their door. At this point the only way we can help them is by sending your ships over there to help them repell or at least delay the invasion. Fortunately we now control the Suez canal, for we don't have much time.

Here is what has been decided:
You are to participate in the Japanese operation "Ten-Go" (Don't ask me what that means). Their plan is to cripple the US naval forces gathered near Okinawa before they assemble and attack the island.

Unfortunately, if I understood the report of the Japanese intelligence, the Americans have mustered an incredible number of carriers and battleships and the Japanese navy is mostly destroyed, especially their carriers.
Fortunately, our Japanese allies have a cunning plan: Nine of their own battleships, under the command of vice-admiral Seiichi Ito, will tie up and draw away the biggest part of the American fleet. At the same time you, with the help of the Japanese battleship Yamato, will attack by surprise the US Task Force 58 containing their carriers and sink them. Without carriers they can't keep attacking Japan, and the time they build new ones will allow the Japanese to regroup and rearm.

Given the firepower you'll going to face, but also to make us look a little more serious as an international naval power, we have added the Tirpitz to your taskforce. Do I really need to say that you are not to lose her? Or the Yamato? You know the drill.
You also get the first of the brand new Type XXVI long range fast submarines, and the cruiser submarine U-112: You'll need all the firepower you can get, unfortunately that's all we could send from Germany in time.
By the way, don't bother with infantry, this will be a pure sea battle. Go!


Instructions: With the assistance of some Japanese vessels, sink all the carriers of US Task Force 58. The Tirpitz and two submarines have been added to your force as new core units. You are not to lose the Tirpitz, nor the Japanese battleship Yamato.
Do not bother to deploy any land units, there is no land in this scenario.