The Marine Expeditionary Force
Summer 2018
by none

20 scenarios

What-If Campaign, partly fictitious geography.
If amphibious warfare is your thing, take command of this small german expeditionary force in early 1944 and try your hand in combined amphibious and naval operations worldwide.
Can you be efficient on sea, air and land simultaneously? (Scroll down)


Difficulty:
Average *

Historical background:
It's spring of 1944. Hitler has somehow been persuaded not to attack Russia (yet), the USA are focussing on Japan, and Churchill is pretty much the only adversary Germany faces. As a result, Germany was able to modernize and re-arm during the years 1941-1944.
Spring 1944 the High Command has come up with a new weapon: A mobile marine expeditionary force. Its task is not to conquer, but to destroy enemy installations and to strike where the enemy expects it least. Its playground: The seven seas.
You're the lucky one to command this revolutionary weapon.

Hints:
Many maps don't have land airports or even land, so don't buy any planes which can't use carriers.
The High Command will occasionally award you capital ships (very expensive!), so you don't have to waste prestige on those. You might need to buy smaller ships though.
Your infantry force is an amphibious assault force, it has to be extremely mobile and reactive. Buy/upgrade accordingly. For instance heavy artillery and slow tanks are a bad idea and might cause you to lose you the campaign. Mobility, versatility, marine landing capacity are the specifications you're looking for.  
Never leave the battlefield with your forces in too bad a shape. You'll never know what might happen on the way home! Also, often there is no time/possibility to do any shopping between missions, simply because you're too far away. Plan ahead, and make always sure you can fight yet another battle if needed.
A good way to spend Prestige is to overstrength your troops. You have few units, they need to be as efficient as possible!
Take great care of your precious carriers. If you lose one, you'll lose your command.


* Difficulty rating:
Easy - Casual - Average - Master - Impossible
"Average" means that with a little effort a player used to OG should be able to achieve Victories (maybe even Brilliant ones).