You know Malta, this darn rock in the narrowest part of the Mediterranean, don't you.
The fat brit calls it his "unsinkable aircraft carrier", and it allows him to be a major pain in the neck of our friends the Italians (and thus our own neck too).
For 2 years we've been hesitating to capture it; But now Gibraltar has fallen, the time has come at last to execute Operation Herkules, the joint German-Italian assault on Malta.

Be careful. At Gibraltar we took them by surprise, but this time they are expecting us, and Malta is heavily fortified. It's protected by troops, naval artillery, mines, and most likely several ships of the British "Force H", which comprises several heavy cruisers and battleships. Fortunately we have the battleships of our friends the Italians.
Speaking of our friends the Italians... They have pulled a Balbo on us, they have mobilized everyting they could. Apparently they want the world to think Malta has been taken by them, with only a minor participation from Germany...
High Command is amused, but not overly so, as a result they decided to expand your force so it doesn't get entirely lost in the Italian parade.
There was no time to bring in troops and ships, but the Admiral Graf Spee happened to be patrolling in the south Atlantic, and thus is henceforth part of your force. Don't lose her, you know the drill.
We have also flown in two companies of the Brandenburg Division. Both are highly experienced and have extensive parachute training. They will fit right in in your strike force.

One concession the Italians had to make: You're the famous hero who just captured Gibraltar, so you are to command the combined forces. (It was that, or they could attack Malta all on their own.)
So, you will have a large force and many ships; Beware though, we're almost sure the British have broken the Italian navy code and will be expecting you. The major part of the Force H is at Alexandria, but some ships have been seen around, among them at least one battleship, probably the Nelson. Don't expect too much of the Italian navy, the British will be hard to beat. Be careful and - Good luck!


Instructions: Take all VHs. Don't lose your carriers or your new heavy cruiser, the Admiral Graf Spee; You'll get to keep her and her scout plane. You also gain two regiments of Brandenburgers, very capable commando units, exactly the kind of troops you need.
