102 BC * First trial of strength with the Cilician pirates * PLvsPL

In the eastern Mediterranean a power vacuum arised by reason of the demise of the Seleucid Empire in the 2nd Century BC, what was the reason that a well-organized piracy could establish and operate from ports in Cilicia.

At the height of their power the Cilician pirates were no longer a simple group of buccaneers: 
According to Plutarch, they had more than 30,000 seafarers on 1000 ships, conquered 400 cities and were well organized.
Especially their outrageous splendor was resented. Far away from acting as ragged cut-throats, they did their business of piracy on Ships with golden sails, purple sun roofs on the upper deck and silvered oars ..... 
They not only lived cultivated, they also used a harsh humor.
If a prisoner relies on being Roman, the pirates did very frightened as if an unforgivable mistake occured, and dressed  in the manner of a roman with toga and boots, so he could immediately been identified as roman.
When they had then had their fun, they let a ladder down to the water and asked their prisoners politely to leave the ship, and to go his way, he were free. 
When he, being in the middle of the sea, wasn´t in the mood for this, they gave him a "helping" hand to get out....
The first military actions of Rome against the pirates remained without lasting success or failed.
Marcus Antonius Orator, grandfather of the famous Marcus Antonius, fought the pirates in 102BC, when he was praetor in Cilicia (what granted him a triumph, although his success was rather questionable...)

Briefing:

Cilician pirates: relocate with a minimum of 7 units to the southwest !As an alternative it is sufficient to kill the Roman Prätor...
The conquest of the port would also be helpful as own supply may there be employed...

Romans: prevents the escape of the pirates! Take good care of your Praetor!Relief is expected in the southeast, there is also a Roman supply hex


have fun! :-)     S. de Mont Tonnerre, MMXIV