Caesar Caesar Caesar!

[ANTIQUE GENERAL VERSION 3.0]


Gaius Julius Caesar was a son of the venerable, but minor noble family of the Julii. Caesar is historically first mentioned, when he was a young man in a lower office position organizing extravagant games that over-indebted him totaly...This may say something about his character....
For a long time all historical sources are quiet until he appears to the stage of World History in 58 BC in the age of 42, when he is appointed as governor of Roman Gaul, a small province at the northwest border of the former Roman Republic. Under his direct command are three  Legions, and he immediately begins the conscription of two others.
Under dubious circumstances he starts war against the Gallic tribes. The  following years go by with changing alliances and wars with various Gallic tribes. (If Gaul have had a centralistic government and army, Cäsar would only be a little footnote in history books)

Caesar often crossed the Rhine and landed twice in Britain, whitch was a completely unexplored area for former romans,and militarily insignificant, but enormously prestigious for Caesar.
When Vercingetorix surrendered after 6 years of war and the lost battle of Alesia in 52 BC, has Caesar  conquered an area that was as big as the Roman Republic before, so he doubled the Roman territory ...
Historians estimate that several million Gauls were killed during the fighting. Caesar himself says in "De Bello Gallico" tersely " .... the remaining several tens of thousands were killed ..... "
At all the very factual style of the book is intended by him....
Caesar was a master of propaganda ...
In 48 BC Caesar is prompted by the Roman Senate to give back the command of his legions and return to Rome. Caesar sees this as a personal insult (even this may say something about his character...) and returns in forced marches with only 5000 of his legionnaires and exceeds by saying "Alea Jacta est" the Rubicon, the ancient border of the city of Rome, that shall be never exceeded  by a commander with troops. His enemies believe that he has appeared with all the Legions and flee... 

The Senate gave the command of their loyal Legions to Popmpeius, an experienced old "warhorse" who is already alowed to be named "magnus" (The Great).
Pompeius hears from his scouts that Cäsar is coming with all his Legions and feels not ready to fight him.
So he decides to pull back to Greece amd wait there for Cäsar.
The following battles of the civil war take place in Spain, Greece and North Africa, and follow always the same pattern: a few experienced veterans of the Gallic war against many inexperienced Legionaires of the Senate.
Finally Caesar wins and proclaims himself "Dictator for life", de facto the first Emperor. For sincere Roman Republicans unacceptable - his end is known.
Caesar's strength was less a superior military genius -Alexander and Hannibal were therein better- but the extreme scooping of its resources and charisma: we know that his legions would have followed him everywhere ...


...at the ceremony to your promotion to Legate, Quintus Icilius, an old scarred centurion and good friend of your family, calls you aside...
"...Congratulations, you've convinced Caesar to be able to lead a legion. To obtain command of the fifth Legion is a great honor !...

Think on my advice:
Hold your formation in all circumstances!  ...and hold ranks closed... get your wounded from the first line, and replace them immediately
The barbarians will attack head-on, resist their attacks...do your counter attack not before most of them lay dead to your ranks...
Our artillery is far superior to their archers, you have to take advantage of it!
A good general tries to get a complete view of the battlefield!...for this you have scouts and spies...by the way, spies can be transported and refreshed in large battleships...

and now, legate of the Fifth Legion, go and multiply the glory of Rome!
Ave Caesar! "


...the Intro to every Scenario is written by Caesar himself, taken from the Commentarii de Bello Gallico...


MMXV +++ S. de Mont Tonnerre