Varus versus Arminius 4P

player 1-R: Varus Legio XVIII and parts of Legio XX
player 2-G: Arminius, Northern horde
player 3-R: General of the rearguard, Legio XIX and parts of XX
player 4-G: Warlord of the Southern horde


HISTORICAL CORRECT BATTLE:

This seems to be the place of the Varusbattle indeed.

The Kalkriese mountain near Osnabrück. Here many remains of roman legionary equipment have been found at a long line following the route of the  ancient street. Also from the coins found none has been dated later as the historically secured date of the battle ( late summer 9 AD).

The map has been built according to the facts at that time and the trained strategist knows immediately: yes here it must have happened ... this place is perfect for an ambush...


HISTORICAL SITUATION:

the original plan of emperor Augustus was to make Germania right of Rhine to a roman province............As Governor Varus has been transfered from the near east...by his rigorous manner he soon is on the bad side of all Germans...

The young german nobleman Arminius, educated as hostage in Rome and serving in the roman army as commander of auxiliary units, has the complete trust of Varus..
By the way as commander he knows the strengths and weaknesses of the roman army very well...

When Varus in summer 9 AD moves his 3 Legions into the west for the wintercamp into the safe left Rhine region Arminius realizes his chance...

Pretending to scout the area ahead he takes over command of the rebellious Germans and prepares an ambush for Varus........

This has been the biggest defeat in the 1000 years of roman army: 3 Legions have been annilihated...according to tradition Augustus in despair has claimed "Oh Vare, Vare Legiones redde!" meaning " Oh Varus, Varus bring me back my legions!"......The numbers of the 18., 19. and 20. legion never have been attached again and the three legion eagles have never been found ( the biggest shame for a roman general and according to my knowledge the only legion eagles ever been lost).

After this defeat any roman plans of expansion into the right Rhine area have been cancelled and the Rhine border has been enforced. While in the german Southwest people could enjoy the advantages of roman civilisation and pax romana ( Trevorum Augusta= Trier has been the largest city north of the alpes and capital and emperors seat) the barbars in the east never had these...:-)


REGULATIONS.

There is no prestige granted, except in round 1 with 200 pp for each roman player and 400 pp for each german player

Reinforcements for the Romans, Legio XX which is assigned to both roman players, reaches battlefield in round 4
