The Battle of Veii, 408 BC

Under the reign of Etruscans Rome was booming.
The Etruscans taught the Romans how to build streets, drains, aqueducts and temples.  
Shortly later the metropolis we know today, arose on the former marsh between the seven hills of loosely scattered villages 
After a long rule of Etruscan kings, the last of them, Tarquinius Suberbus, was driven out by the Romans and the Republic is set up.
Immediately the Romans begin to subdue the surrounding countryside, but for further expansion the League of Twelve Etruscan Cities stood in their way...after long preparation, years of struggle and truces Rome is ready for the decisive blow: Veii.
The Etruscan metropolis, located very close in the north-west of Rome is a member of the League of the Twelve Etruscan Cities and seals off all further expansion efforts of Rome....if Rome wants to grow, Veii first and foremost has to fall...!
It was the first time that the Romans subdued a foreign nation to gain forever ground beyond the old boundary of the Latin landscape, north of the Tiber..... 

Livy describes the scene with the Veientines holed up in their city, the main Roman force encamped outside and a second force set to attack from within via the tunnel. After this prayer from Camillus,

"Pythian Apollo, guided and inspired by thy will I go forth to destroy the city of Veii, and a tenth part of its spoils I devote to thee. Thee too, Queen Juno, who now dwellest in Veii, I beseech, that thou wouldst follow us, after our victory, to the City which is ours and which will soon be thine, where a temple worthy of thy majesty will receive thee". Then he attacked from all sides, because he had men more than enough.

Veii itself, is left in the lurch by his allies, the League of the Twelve Etruscan Cities, only a few neighboring towns, Capena, Faleri and Tarquinia, came to their aid .....
The Romans found military support to the Latins and Hernicans, Whome the fall of the dreaded Etruscan neighbors promised as much benefit than the Romans themselves.

S. de Mont Tonnerre MMXIII