General,

Thanks to your brilliant command you have managed to evacuate the germ of a new Belgian army. The fight can now continue in France, in Congo or wherever is needed to restore the independence and freedom of Belgium. 

I am confident you are eager to play a major role in the future operations of our Army. That’s why your new mission will be to prepare our forces in Congo to be ready to fight. 

…but first you deserve some rest. 

Le Chef d'Etat-major général de l’armée (EMGA).

Historical note: 

When the Dunkirk evacuation started on 27 May the Belgian Army was to the brink of collapse. The Belgians had practically exhausted all available means of resistance. They had no reserves, the Luftwaffe had air supremacy, rail networks were destroyed and roads were blocked by 3 million civilian refugees. Under these circumstances further retreat was not feasible and resistance useless. On the evening of 27 May King Leopold III requested an armistice. Despite the advice of his government, the King decided to stay in Belgium to share the fate of his army and people. 

The Belgian unconditional surrender came into effect at 04:00 on 28 May. Recriminations abounded with the British and French claiming the Belgians had betrayed the alliance. The reality was that since 25 May the Allies were aware of the critical Belgian situation. In spite of that, the Belgians extended their resistance for almost three days, frequently holding after British unexpected withdrawals, allowing the Allied armies to prepare their evacuation. On the contrary, when it was inquired if any Belgians were to be evacuated, the Chief of General Staff for the British Expeditionary Force replied "We don't care a bugger what happens to the Belgians".

Although some Belgian soldiers were indeed evacuated it was not the result of an organized operation but of casual or individual circumstances.

Despite the armistice, the Belgian army continued to fight in different scenarios … but that is another story.
