General,

Despite your desperate resistance the 3rd and 4th Panzerdivisionen have finally broken through towards Tongres. This has forced our Army to abandon the "Position de Couverture" of the Canal Albert sooner than foreseen and as a consequence has undermined the deployment of the 1re armée française in the "Ligne KW" (Dyle position).

However, the battle has just started.

Le Chef d'Etat-major général de l’armée (EMGA).

Historical note:

Thanks to the use of glider infantry and elite-pioneer troops Germans succeeded in taking not only two bridges over the Canal Albert (Vroenhoven and Veldwezelt, which were not destroyed on time) but also destroying the strong fortress of Eben-Emael. The capture of Eben-Emael was extremely important as it dominated the whole region and protected all the bridges in this region. 

Initial counterattacks by the Belgian 7th division were done late, in a small scale and without arillery support; the Luftwaffe had destroyed communications and prevented all movement of troops.

Although the Belgians succeeded in containing the bridgehead no sufficient reserves were available for a large-scale counterattack. On the contrary the Germans were constantly dropping new paratroopers at the bridges and the fortress of Eben-Emael.

On the 11th May things were getting worse. The arrival of the main German troops, and notably of the 3rd and the 4th Panzerdivision, was too much for the Belgian 7th division. The Germans expanded the bridgeheads and drove the Belgian troops back.

The Germans managed to give the Belgians a tactical defeat. The 7th division was almost completely destroyed and had to be sent to France for reorganisation. The Belgians could only stop the Germans for one day at the Albert canal instead of the three days initially planned. But worse, the loss of the Eben-Emael fortress was a serious psychological blow. 

However, the retreat of the Belgian army to his main line of defence at the Dyle River succeeded, so nothing was lost yet. 

 