These are the Weak Hand Rules used to test the OpenAK SSI Blitzkrieg campaign.

The original concept is based on the Weak Hand rules for Panzer General 3D.

The basic idea is to encourage/force the use of units that generally are never used by any PG player in their right mind, and to make the force pool more realistic in it's composition, as well as simply provide a greater challenge for a much loved and played game, and ultimately to add to the fun factor.  Don't be put off by the long list of rules, most of them are there to deal with specific situations you may encounter, at it's heart the concept is fairly simple.  That concept is summed up in rule number 3.

Weak Hand Rules for Open General:

1.   No game reloads are allowed except between scenarios in a campaign, or in a situation where a turn is ended accidentally or a mistake is made as a result of mental incompetence.  Please make it a point to reload for these mistakes whether something good has happened or not in the interim.  Examples of "mental incompetence" include, but are not limited to, forgetting to move all your units, misclicking and accidentally moving the wrong unit, doing something obviously incredibly stupid because you haven't had your coffee yet, or you are drunk, etc.  Don't feel bad, it happens to me all the time.  This is the one set of rules where the, "Sorry Your Honour, I was hammered." defence is acceptable.

2.  If an unintentional infraction of the rules occurs, simply pick up and proceed with the rules from the point the infraction is discovered in the way which addresses the infraction in accordance with the rules between scenarios.  For example, if you accidentally miss a unit you should have purchased or upgraded to, simply purchase or upgrade to the unit at your earliest convenience and carry on.

3.  Units must be purchased and upgraded to in order, starting from the least expensive of the available specific units of each general unit type to the most expensive of the available specific unit types, in order.  When the most expensive specific unit type of the general unit type has been reached, you must start over again in order, proceeding from the least expensive specific unit type, and so on.  If two units are available that have the same cost you may choose which order you wish to purchase them in.

4.  When a unit is reached in the force pool it becomes permanently available unless it is destroyed.  Units upgraded to or purchased in this way are designated as reserved.  For example if you purchase a unit of German 40 Infanterie (mot), and then upgrade that unit, you may go back and purchase another 40 Infanterie (mot) unit at any time and designate it as reserved.  Note that according to rule 11 you can purchase up to three of these units this way after they have been reached in the purchase order, assuming none of them are destroyed.  Note that looping through the purchase order multiple times will add to the number of units you can designate as reserved.

5.  New units that become available are added to the purchase order retroactively.  So that a less expensive new unit must be purchased before older more expensive units even though more expensive units than the newer unit have already been purchased.

6.  Any unit when purchased or upgraded to must remain as that specific unit type for the duration of one full scenario, unless the unit becomes obsolete or no other more expensive units are purchased or upgraded to, in that case it can be reassigned and it will still be a required unit in the purchase order.  This means that if a unit is purchased during a scenario, it cannot be upgraded or reassigned until the following scenario has ended unless no more expensive units of that general type have been purchased, in which case it may be reassigned but for the purposes of the weak hand rules it will be as if that specific unit type was never purchased.

7.  When a specific unit type is no longer available to be purchased it is to be designated as obsolete and must be upgraded according to the Weak Hand rules, or reassigned immediately.  You may have up to four units in your force pool which are obsolete or are not available due to Fronts and Factions settings.  Note that this rule does not apply to other country units.

8.  If the order of available units permits this, and there is more than one specific unit type of the general unit type available, a unit may be specifically designated as upgraded to it's own specific unit type, in accordance with the Weak Hand rules.  Note that you can only do this when you have a specific available objective unit in mind.  You cannot use this rule to endlessly loop through the available units to allow yourself the flexibility of upgrading to any unit you choose.

For example, later in the Blitzkrieg campaign you could well end up with one Fw 190A-1 and one Me 109F-4.  When the Fw 190A-1 is available to be purchased, you may designate the Me 109F-4 as upgraded.  You cannot then upgrade it for one full scenario, but you may at the beginning of the following scenario upgrade it to an Fw 190A-1.  You will have essentially looped through all the available specific unit types twice.

9.  You may not purchase or upgrade to a specific unit type which either cannot be deployed, or would not normally be deployed in the specific scenario due to it's specific, terrain related, tactical context.  However when a scenario is reached it which a unit which has fallen under this rule could, or would be deployed, it must take it's place in the designated purchase and upgrade order retroactively.  Any prototype received which violates this rule must be immediately upgraded, however it may be upgraded to any unit of equal value or less, the new unit may be taken out of order but it will count as the unit of that specific type the next time it's position in the force pool is reached.  It is permissible to use Open Suite to edit game saves if necessary in this case.

For examply, if you receive a naval unit prototype in a scenario that includes naval units,  in the next scenario that does not include naval units you must upgrade it, or reassign it, and edit a game save using Open Suite to do so.  You may upgrade it to any available unit of any class of equal value or less. Another example of this would be the Panzerzug unit, which is undeployable in scenarios with no railroads.  However, in that case you would not need to use Open Suite to edit the game file and you must upgrade it to an available unit of the same class of equal or lesser value.

10.  You may interchange the leaders of units of a general unit type by upgrading a unit to a specific unit type which you currently have in your force pool.  You may then reassign the unit you are switching the leader to, or switch it in a similar fashion to the specific unit type of another unit you have in your force pool, or you can exchange it with the specific unit type of the unit which is being originally switched, or you may upgrade it.

A switch will not count as an upgrade or purchase for the purposes of the Weak Hand rules but upgrading to a unit which you did not originally have in your force pool will.  A unit may only make one switch per scenario, and may not be upgraded or reassigned for the duration of one full scenario after switching.  After all units which are to be switched have been switched, you must end up with either the same number of each specific type, or less as a result of reassigning or upgrading.

You may, if you wish, change transports while switching.

For example, if you have a cavalry unit and a bridge engineer unit, and you want to swap the leaders, you may upgrade the bridge engineer unit to a cavalry unit, and the cavalry unit to a bridge engineer unit without it counting as an upgrade according to the rules.  Or if you posses a cavalry unit and a bridge engineer unit, you may upgrade the bridge engineer unit to a cavalry unit, and then either disband the cavalry unit, or switch it to another specific unit type you possess in your force pool, or upgrade it in accordance with the weak hand rules.

11.  If a specific unit type has a prestige value of 100 or less, not including transport, you may purchase or upgrade to 3 units of this specific unit type before having to move up to the next specific unit type, and you may do this at any time.  If the specific unit type has a value of 200 or less, not including transport, you may purchase or upgrade to 2 units according to the same rules.

For example if you have purchased a garrison unit with a prestige value of 100 or less you may at any time after that purchase two more without  being forced to purchase or upgrade to a higher value unit, and if you have purchased higher value units, you may go back and purchase those extra two at any point in the campaign.

12.  Prototypes count as a purchase or upgrade according to the rules, unless they are immediately upgraded pursuant to rule 8.  So if you receive a prototype unit, you may not then purchase or upgrade to a second unit of that specific unit type when you reach it in the purchase order, until you have "wrapped around" to it and purchased or upgraded to two of all of the less expensive available specific unit types of that general unit type.

13.  Prototype units cannot be upgraded or reassigned for the period of one full turn, with the exception granted in rule 8.  However, after one scenario has passed you may upgrade a prototype unit to any unit of equal or lesser prestige value without regard to the regular weak hand rules.  Once this has been done the prototype unit ceases to be a prototype unit for the purposes of this rule, and the specific unit type upgraded to will count as having been chosen according to the weak hand rules.  For the purpose of this rule campaign initial starting core units are considered to be prototypes.

14.  At any time during a campaign you may select two units from allied nations to which the weak hand rules do not apply with one exception noted below.  These units may be selected in any order and they do not need to be upgraded or reassigned when they become obsolete or when that nation's units are no longer available.

15.  When a specific unit type is ugraded from, or reassigned, it automatically becomes part of your your reserve force pool.  At any time you may activate and have active up to two reserve units.  Note that this rule does not apply to units which have been destroyed.  Destroyed units do not have their specific unit type added to the reserve force pool.  Also when units become obsolete, they are removed from the reserve force pool.

16.  Any unit that has the "Influence" leader special may upgrade to any specific unit type available, irrespective of the weak hand rules.  The specific unit type upgraded to in this manner will be considered to have been chosen for the purposes of the weak hand rules when it is reached in the force pool order.

17.  For the purposes of these rules original core units will be treated as prototype units.  This means you can upgrade to a unit of equal or lesser prestige value, without reaching less valuable units first.  Those units must also remain in your force pool for the duration of an entire scenario before they can be upgraded.
