Western Moldavia - August 6th, 1917

Liebe Anna,

In your last letter you seemed worried about my destiny here, in Romania. But believe me, there is no reason to feel any anxiety. Your mind should get rid of those ominous thoughts. Pay no attention to gossips and rumours. They are useless, and they contribute to demoralize the civilians as much as the troops.

Yes, the Romanians have shown an amazing ability to resist our offensives. It’s incredible that they haven’t surrendered yet. But don’t forget that they have the continuous support of the Russians. Without their help, we would have already wiped all of Romania out. And we know that the Russian bear is dying. They are fighting against each other, they have dethroned their Czar, and the new republican government is an incompetent mess. It’s true that they were able to launch an offensive against our lines, but in a few weeks we had everything under control again. This new Russian attack will be a failure, and it’s just a matter of time until they surrender.

Once the Russians accept their defeat, Romania will fall too. Maybe sooner than we expect. A couple of weeks ago they launched an attack against the Austro- Hungarians, which had a limited success. I think the news of that battle were the ones that worried you. However, nothing serious happened, and now our enemies are vulnerable. They haven’t had time to build solid defences and I think that, if we counterattack soon, we’ll be able to surprise them and crush them once and for all. Then the end of the war will be one step closer. One step closer to peace, and to be back with you.

So be happy, my love. Although these days will be difficult for us, they won’t be the hardest ones that we’ve experienced. And I am confident that soon we’ll be together again.

I miss you dearly,

Hugo.

ORDERS: Oberstleutnant Bauernschmitt, your goal will be to take and hold the villages of Panciu, Marasesti, and other locations in the region of Vrancea. You’ll have the help of three German and one Austro- Hungarian divisions. Although there is a strong enemy presence in the area, we believe that they haven’t had time to consolidate their positions, so their defence lines will be poorly built, and a bold counterattack is likely to succeed.

OBJECTIVES: Take all VHs.

SPECIAL NOTE: This is a great opportunity to upgrade your outdated units.
    
