Hermannstadt, Transylvania - September, 25th 1916

Liebe Anna,

You cannot imagine what it meant to my comrades and me, when we finally received our orders to leave our positions at Verdun. Any place on God's Great Earth is better than this bone mill that has grinded many a brave man during the last months. Achim was the last of us to die at Verdun. You know, we went to Gymnasium together, long ago in happier times before the war. I still remember how we talked about our future plans in the school yard on our graduation day. Now, Achim's future has already become past. A sniper's bullet pierced his handsome face when he lit a cigarette. He died in my arms on an otherwise particularly quiet day at the front. 

His dead face haunted me on the long railway trip to Transylvania. I am almost relieved that we are now going into action again, and there is no time anymore for those dark thoughts. Soon the fighting will start again, as we are supposed to repulse the Romanians who have crossed the Carpathians and swiftly advanced as far as Hermannstadt, deep into Transylvania, after they had declared war on Austria-Hungary in August.

The Alpenkorps is going to play a major role in the forthcoming operation, but I cannot tell you anything about it yet. Pray for me, mein Schatz!

Ich küsse Dich,
Dein Hugo


ORDERS:  Oberstleutnant Hugo Bauernschmitt, while our 187th Division and 76th Reserve Division join the 51st Hungarian Honved Division in a major offensive near Hermannstadt, the Alpenkorps has been given the task to cross the Cibin Moutains in the Southern Carpathians and take the Roterturmpass ("Red Tower Pass"). The Roterturmpass is the lifeline of the Romanian invading army. Any reinforcements and supplies to their troops around Hermannstadt must come over the mountains at this point, and in case of a general retreat this is the only route back for the Romanians. Therefore, expect strong counter-attacks by the enemy at any time. Hold this pass at any cost, and victory will be ours!

    
OBJECTIVES: Take and hold 6 VHs for a BV, 5 VHs for a V and 4 VHs for a TV.