July, 1., 1863  Gettysburg


Dear Friend, 
once again the best rebel general, General Lee, has penetrated far into the north of our territory...
He is threatening Washington D.C. as well as Baltimore and Philadelphia, and in addition he is tying useful troops of us up here...
Our cavallery scouts have spotted a  confederate reconnaissance unit near Gettysburg...expecting the mass of Lee´s army to be close our troops errected provisional defense positions around Gettysburg in the last moment..
My army Corps originally was intended to support the South East but being near by chance we have to support our comrades in Gettysburg...
My men think it has been only a small enemy rec unit, but I am sure General Lee will be here with the mass of his troops any moment...


ORDERS:
General, it is good fortune that you have been near. Strengthen immediately the front of Gettysburg with your men !
This might well be one of the decisive battles of the war... if we loose here the Hinterland is wide open for Lee... if we win, we will break the neck of general Lee´s army and do away with a permanent threat !
Hold the Codori- Heights at any cost !!!
Enemy reinforcement, the II. confederate Corps, will arrive from the west....
Our reinforcements are exected from the east and later on from the south.....


HOLD 4/3/2 VHs FOR BV/V/TV


ADVICE FROM YOUR OLDEST SERGEANT:
If not already done, you should definitely deliver transport for your core-infantery: they have to disburden our comrades in Gettysburg as fast as possible...
It might be that we have to give up Gettysburg for the moment and to reconquer it later....
Eventually we should shorten our frontline and draw back; but on the other side our positions in the mountains are very valuable... so you have to act with care..
We should keep some pp in reserve, if we might be necessary to refresh our troops.... draw battered troops and those without ammunition from the first line and replace them immediately...

BE AWARE of Longstreet´s confederate reinforcement in the WEST. You should send our Corps against them FIRST !

