April, 1., 1865  Close the Trap (Ft. Stedman + Five Forks)


----{secret telegraph depeche to general}-----
THE WHITE HOUSE; WASHINGTON,

Dear Sir,
herewith, we comply with your request: General Franz Sigel will be detached as commander or your cavalry to your army corps. Furthermore we comply with the request of some of your best cavalrists to built a cavalry regiment of their own:
congratulations to the "Revengers of Waghaeusel" ! 
Furthermore half of the liberated slaves from Fort Fisher wished to fight on with you: we have formed three regiments and have put them under your direct command....

THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
-----{end of secret telegraph depeche}----


Dear Friend,
the rebels are quite desperate by now: General Lee exactly knows that by taking Petersburg, we would surround his whole army near Richmond.
If we close the siege and take Petersburg we have depraved General Lee from any action possibility.
Of course the rebels are aware of this, and I bet they will try everything to break the siege. I feel this might become one of the heaviest fights of the war. 
Even more it has been raining for weeks and all rivers are impassable... my men are already joking that they will have to carry out their next land battle from canon boats. 
But nevertheless, HQ has granted my request to put General Sigel in command of my cavalry... if its is about flanking, there is no one better than Franz....
It is dawning and I have to move to our positions....


ORDERS:
aah general, welcome to Fort Stedman  ...bourbon and beer?
well, meanwhile we gathered enough troops aruond Petersburg: time to take the next step...move forward with caution and take Petersburg and all the area south of Appomattox !
...then we have closed the trap for the rebels...


TAKE ALL VH's

NOTE: In this Scenario "Skip first Player Turn" is activated : The Confederates starts...


ADVICE FROM YOUR OLDEST SERGEANT:
Attention, General: the rebels are completely desperate and have nothing to loose....I bet my horse, my sabre and my pay of the next two years that they will attack us frontally disregarding losses.....
