Madagascar Expedition - Tsarasoatra - June 29th, 1895


Ma chère Fabienne,

please forgive me my poor writing, for my hand is trembling from fever. But don't be afraid, I already feel much better today. This is actually the first day I was up and could even take a short walk, after an awful fortnight I had to spend in the field hospital here at Suberbieville. Consider me to be a lucky one, ma belle! Malaria, typhoid fever and any other dreadful disease you can imagine have taken its toll on my brave men during the last months, since we have landed on the shores of this godforsaken island that is called Madagascar. We were sent out to destroy the Merina Kingdom of Queen Ranavalona III, who has refused to turn her country into a French protectorate. But until now, our real enemy has been this devilish jungle, and we had to bury many a good man during our march on the Malagasi capital Antananarivo. General Duchesne, who is in charge of our expedition, is confident that we will leave the jungle soon and enter the highlands, where the climate will be much healthier.

Fortunately, our enemy, the Hova army of Queen Ranavalona, has not tried to stop our advance so far. We spotted two columns of their infantry a few days ago, but they retreated into the jungle, as soon as we lifted our rifles against them. I think...

Oh, I have to stop here, my chère Fabienne. General Duchesne has just informed me that our outpost at Tsarasoatra is being attacked by Hova forces. Thousands of them seem to assault the positions of my dear friend Lt.-Colonel Lentonnet and his Algerian Regiment. I have to hurry forward with my men, if we want to save them. Thank God, I have a good horse that will carry me to where my weak feet will not be able to lead me...



ORDERS: Colonel Bertaux-Levillain, you are ordered to relieve our outpost at Tsarasoatra, defeat the attacking Malagasi forces of the Hova army and advance along the jungle road in order to destroy and take the enemy´s field camp.

REMARKS: In this scenario, the option "Skip first player's turn" is activated.





