The First World War - The Gallipoli Landing - April 27th, 1915

Ma chère Fabienne,

I am still alive, but I am afraid that's more or less the only good news I can tell you from this ill-fated operation. You know how furious I was when I got to know that my brave men and I would be sent to the Dardanelles as support to our British friends in their attempt to break through the Dardanelles and take Constantinople. I wanted to fight the Boches on our own soil, and not engage in an operation that appears to have been planned by a bunch of lunatic British aristocrats without the slightest knowledge of how to conduct amphibious landings of such a scale. You can't delude an old warhorse like me! I felt it in my guts right from the start. And unfortunately, I have been proven right.  
 
During the last two days my troops conducted a landing operation on the Asian side of the Dardanelles as a diversion from the main landings of our British and ANZAC brothers in arms, who tried to gain a foothold on the Gallipoli peninsula. Our action at Kum Kale nearly ended as a disaster with about 800 of my brave men dying at the hands of the ferociously fighting Turks. Only the guns of our navy rescued us and we were safely evacuated.

Now we're crossing the Dardanelles to support our allies on the Gallipoli peninsula, and from the little information I have received from my British counterparts, we will jump out of the frying pan right into the fire. When only half of the rumours are true, their landings have been a bloodbath and their troops have hardly reached any of their objectives by now.

Pray for us! Je t'embrasse,

Jean-Babtiste.


ORDERS: Général Bertaux-Levillain, I want to come clean with you. The situation at Gallipoli is grave. The British have landed their troops, but some of their battalions have suffered casualty rates of 70% on a single day. The Turkish resistance is much tougher than expected, and the Brits now wait for us to reinforce their right flank, so we can advance on the town of Krithia together. Bring your troops ashore as quick as possible and attack the Turkish positions.


OBJECTIVES: Take and hold all VHs for a BV, 7 VHs for a V and 5 VHs for a TV. 