The First World War - Chunuk Bair - August 06th, 1915

Ma chère Fabienne,

The months are passing without any kind of significant progress. At Cape Helles, where we landed in April, we're still stuck just a few miles outside the town of Krithia. Our offensives have been repelled by the Turks time and time again. But I can't even tell who is the worse enemy: the brave "Johnny Turk" infantryman on the other side of no man's land or the myriad of flies harrassing us every second of our pitiful existance in our dusty trenches, making it impossible to even eat a small bite of bread without swallowing half a dozen of these despicable pests.

Finally, our joint chief of staff has come to the conclusion that only a major offensive will be able to break the stalemate. British reinforcements, numbering five divisions, are on their way, and it has been decided that they will be landed a few miles north of Anzac Cove, where our Australian and New Zealand brothers in arms are holding a small bridgehead. 

The initial plan has foreseen some diversionary attacks to cover the landing operation at Suvla Bay: one by the ANZAC troops, breaking out of their bridgehead towards the heights of Chunuk Bair, and the other one by the Brits and us here at Cape Helles. But none of us French officers is willing to see our men conduct another suicidal frontal attack on Krithia. After a heated discussion, the British generals have finally agreed to redeploy our troops at Anzac Cove, so we will support the attack of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps there, which has much better prospects of success.

Wish us luck, ma chère, because I know you want me to be home by Christmas! 

Jean-Babtiste.


ORDERS: Général Bertaux-Levillain, the brave men of the ANZAC welcome you. They have been fighting very hard over every inch of soil during the last months, as your men did at Cape Helles. Nevertheless, the Turks still hold the high ground, most importantly the heights of Chunuk Bair and a few other strategic points along the Sari Bair range, which give their artillery a perfect firing position. So taking the heights will be our main objective. If we succeed to take Chunuk Bair, and the landing at Suvla Bay is successful as well, we might be able to join forces north of Krithia, so that the Turks will have to give up their defensive line in the south and retreat towards Constantinople. 


OBJECTIVES: Take all 4 VHs.

IMPORTANT NOTE: Since the landscape is rather rugged, with some steep cliffs blocking the way and dry gullies offering the best routes for advance, you are well advised to study the map carefully and plan your troops' route of attack accordingly. 