The First World War - Verdun - February 21st, 1916

Ma chère Fabienne,

After all the hard and challenging times my brave men and I had to go through during the Gallipoli and the Balkans campaigns, the last weeks here in Verdun, a rather quiet part of the Western front, almost felt like a holiday. Breathing the fresh French air again is such a pleasure, especially when you can enjoy the days without being constantly harassed by enemy fire. But now dark clouds have appeared on the horizon.

Yesterday, I met with my old friend Emile Driant, who is commanding two battalions of Chasseurs here at Verdun. It was a joy to see him again after so many years, but very soon our conversation changed from indulging in reminiscences of our youth to a bleaker subject: Emile is very concerned about a possible German offensive in this sector of the front, a threat which Joffre simply denies. He has even taken the most unusual step of writing directly to the Ministry of Defence, complaining about the inadequate preparations of our defensive positions, especially the lack of workers and barbed wire. Joffre apparently was furious about Emile's letter, when he learned about it from General Gallieni.

Emile now must know how Cassandra felt when her fellow Trojans wouldn't believe her warnings. He has returned to his battalions in the Bois des Caures north of Verdun and tries the best he can to prepare for the worst. And so do I, since I believe this man, because...
...
..
yes, because right now the earth is starting to shake beneath my feet and a terrible symphony of thunder is roaring in the distance. The gates of hell are opening. The Germans attack...

I must hurry, ma chère. Pray for me, pray for Emile who is probably in the middle of the inferno right now. 

Je t'embrasse,

Jean-Babtiste.


ORDERS: Général Bertaux-Levillain, you are ordered to delay the German offensive and hold as much ground as possible.

OBJECTIVES: Hold ALL your initial 8 VHs for a BV, 6 VHs for a V and 4 for a TV.

REMARKS: In this scenario, the option "Skip first player's turn" is activated. You will be able to deploy most of your core units at the start of the second turn.




