The First World War - Verdun - Fort Vaux- June 13th, 1916 - BV

Général, you've done it again! The main German attack has been stopped. No matter how many times they try to break our front, we always manage to repel their assaults. This nightmare won't go on for much longer. The Boches will have to back down very soon. Now let's hope that our allies do their part, and attack the Germans as they have promised.

You look sick, général. I'm not surprised, after four months in this hell. You must take a permission. A long one, I dare to say. Spending the summer at home, with your family, will be good to you. We need you, but only if you're healthy and strong. Go back when you have recovered!


HISTORICAL EVENTS:

1916-JUN-4. While the Germans attack Fort Vaux, the Russians launch the Brusilov offensive.

1916-JUN-7. Fort Vaux surrenders, after one week of heroic resistance. The German losses are so high that they must stop their offensive for a few days. The offensive continues on June 12, but with little success.

1916-JUN-21-23. A new German attack manages to take Fleury. The French defence nearly collapses, and even Pétain and Nivelle consider to vacate the right riverbank of the Meuse. However, the Germans are not able to force a breakthrough.

1916-JUN-25. Knowing that a British offensive in the Somme is imminent, the German Vth army receives the request to be more economical with men, materials and ammunition. The French counterattack at the Verdun front, and the German preparations for the planned attack have to be postponed. The chance for a German breakthrough is gone.

1916-JUL-1. The British offensive at the Somme starts. Troops, artillery and aeroplanes are transferred from the Verdun front to the Somme front. However, bitter fighting still continues over Fleury.

1916-JUL-12. At the Verdun front, a German attack against Fort Souville fails. General Nivelle gives a moving order of the day, in which the French troops are praised for their perseverance and their persistency. He concludes with the famous sentence:  "Ils ne passeront pas!".

1916-JUL/AUG. The German and French attacks continue, with huge losses on both sides and without any significative results. Gradually, the old front line is restored once again and the front becomes quiet. 