The First World War - Verdun - Fort Vaux- May 31st, 1916

Ma chère Fabienne,

I guess that you would hardly recognize me now. In the last weeks my nerves have betrayed me. I can barely eat, and I just sleep three or fours hours every day, at best. Even then, my dreams are plagued with nightmares. I can't tell this to anyone, only to you. Somehow, being able to write this letter and tell you what I'm experiencing is a relief.

The world must have gone crazy. How did we get to this? What a bloodbath, what horrid images, what a slaughter. I just cannot find the words to express my feelings. Hell cannot be much more dreadful. God have mercy of our souls, and forgive our sins!

My current mood makes me miss Pétain even more. At least he understands what's happening. Some time ago, talking about our soldiers, he confided to me that "their expressions seemed frozen by a vision of terror; their gait and their postures betrayed a total dejection; they sagged beneath the weight of horrifying memories". He's a tough officer, but he hasn't lost his humanity yet. His defensive strategy, and his "Noria-relieve system", have allowed us to resist the German assaults so far. Without Pétain, I'm sure thar France would be on the verge of surrender right now.

Just look what happened when he was replaced on May 1st. Let's just say that Nivelle's plan for counterattacking and retaking Fort Douaumont with frontal assaults didn't go as smoothly as he wished. Poor Mangin!

The good thing is that the Germans are exhausted, too. I'm sure that they had expected us to launch pointless counterattacks once an again, so our casualties would have been even greater. Then we would have lost our reserves, and we'd have had to negotiate a peace treaty. Instead, Pétain adopted a defensive strategy, and now it's the Boches who are running out of reserves, and time. Very soon, Britain will launch supportive attacks against the Germans, just like the Russians are doing since March. The Germans will have to retire many troops from here, and we'll finally win this hellish battle of Verdun. 

Of course, that makes the Germans very dangerous now. They know that it's now or never for them. If they don't beat us soon, they'll lose their last chance. If they attack my sector, I just hope that I'll find the strength to do my duty one more time. I'm so tired that every day I think about the possibility of retiring. But, alas, I can't afford being weak right now.

Pray for me, because I really need it. Je t'embrasse,

Jean-Babtiste.


ORDERS: Général Bertaux-Levillain, you are ordered again to delay the German offensive and hold as much ground as possible.

OBJECTIVES: After 14 turns, you must hold 4 VHs for a BV, 3 VHs for a V and 1 for a TV.

REMARKS: In this scenario, the option "Skip first player's turn" is activated. 




