The First World War - Verdun - Fort Vaux- June 13th, 1916 - L

Général, Verdun has fallen. France will fight on, but it's uncertain if we'll recover from this loss. The press is blaming some generals for this debacle. Be sure that it will not be Joffre who has to take the responsibility. You are an old and well-respected soldier, my friend, therefore you will not have to fear court-martial. But it's time for you to resign and make way for younger, more capable commanders. Adieu!  


HISTORICAL EVENTS:

1916-JUN-4. While the Germans attack Fort Vaux, the Russians launch the Brusilov offensive.

1916-JUN-7. Fort Vaux surrenders, after one week of heroic resistance. The German losses are so high that they must stop their offensive for a few days. The offensive continues on June 12, but with little success.

1916-JUN-21-23. A new German attack manages to take Fleury. The French defence nearly collapses, and even Pétain and Nivelle consider to vacate the right riverbank of the Meuse. However, the Germans are not able to force a breakthrough.

1916-JUN-25. Knowing that a British offensive in the Somme is imminent, the German Vth army receives the request to be more economical with men, materials and ammunition. The French counterattack at the Verdun front, and the German preparations for the planned attack have to be postponed. The chance for a German breakthrough is gone.

1916-JUL-1. The British offensive at the Somme starts. Troops, artillery and aeroplanes are transferred from the Verdun front to the Somme front. However, bitter fighting still continues over Fleury.

1916-JUL-12. At the Verdun front, a German attack against Fort Souville fails. General Nivelle gives a moving order of the day, in which the French troops are praised for their perseverance and their persistency. He concludes with the famous sentence:  "Ils ne passeront pas!".

1916-JUL/AUG. The German and French attacks continue, with huge losses on both sides and without any significative results. Gradually, the old front line is restored once again and the front becomes quiet. 