The First World War - Chemin des Dames - early May, 1917 - L

Général, our offensive has been a total disaster! We've captured nothing, and due to our heavy casualties, our front is wide open right now...we could even lose the war!
After this poor performance, we won't need your service anymore. You'd better resign.

HISTORICAL EVENTS:

After a ten day bombardement, the French attacked the German positions at the Chemin des Dames. But the Chemin des Dames Ridge had been quarried for centuries, leaving a warren of caves and tunnels which were used as shelters by the German troops to escape the bombardment. The offensive met massed German machine-gun and artillery fire, which inflicted many casualties and repulsed the French infantry at many points. Finally, the offensive just advanced the front line by 6,7 Km.
 
The operation had been planned as a decisive blow to the Germans. However, by April 20 it was clear that the strategic intent of the offensive had not been achieved and by 25 April most of the fighting had ended. Casualties had reached 20% in the French armies by May 10, and some divisions suffered losses of more than 60 percent of their troops.

The failure had a traumatic effect on the morale of the French army and many divisions mutinied.... singing the Chanson de Craonne.
The song was prohibited in France until 1974. Even though an award of 1 million francs and the immediate honorable release from the army were offered for revealing the original author of the song, he remained unknown.

General Nivelle was superseded by General Philippe Pétain, who adopted a strategy of "healing and defence". Thus, the battle of the Chemin des Dames would be the last pure French offensive in the First World War. The French Supreme Command decided to wait for the American reinforces, since The United States had declared war on Germany on April 6, 1917, a few days before the Nivelle offensive.

Finally, the battle of la Malmaison (October 1917) led to the capture of the fort and the town of Malmaison and the full control of the Chemin des Dames by the French.