The Somme: Flers-Courcelette

September 15th, 1916

Before the end of 1915 the United Kingdom and our allies had decided to launch a series of coordinated offensives against Germany in 1916. However, our enemies attacked first at Verdun, in February, and all our strategy had to be redesigned. Our offensive would take place at the River Somme, as initially planned, but with little support from the French, who had been forced to send reinforcements to the Verdun front.

Haig had ordered that the objectives were to relieve pressure on the French at Verdun and inflict loss on the enemy. I objected that our own losses would also be very high, since the logistical mistakes that we had made at Loos were far from solved. He told me that he understood my concerns, but that the offensive of the Somme was a strategic necessity. The French Army was in serious risk of collapsing at Verdun and, if we did not intervene, they could actually be forced to surrender before the end of the year. He told me that, as long as I accomplished my objectives, I was free to try any measure that could save the lives of the men under my command, especially my small-scale tactics. 

And thus July 1st, the first day of the Somme, came. My Army Corps started again on the reserve, so we were spared the horror of this initial push. A few hours later I was informed that my son William had died in one of the first assaults, just like near 20,000 British soldiers did before the end of that day. For some time I could barely speak, eat or sleep. I thought about retiring and giving way to younger officers, but I finally decided to stay. My divisions had been among the ones with the least losses when they fought on the first line, so although I could not save my own son, if I kept on fighting maybe I could save the sons of others.

My Army Corps was not really engaged until the third week of July, when we fought with great determination at Delville Wood and later at Guillemont. Then September came, and with it, the time for the final assault against the last German line of defense, between Flers and Morval. The German fortifications were impressive, but this time we counted on a new, secret weapon, that supposedly would help us to advance through the oceans of mud and barberd wire. It was our last chance for a total breakthrough. If we could not break the German lines, all that would be left would be the battle of attrition.

(from the memoirs of Lt. Gen. Bruce W. Dickinson)

Victory conditions:
- Take all the VHs.
- Your MSU core unit must survive.

Special note: A tank unit has been added to your core.



