Belmont

November 23rd, 1899

Since the Pretoria Convention was signed in 1881 the British Empire had guaranteed the self-government of the two Boer republics in South Africa. But, during the decade of 1890, new problems started, concerning the rights of the British citizens in the Transvaal. I am convinced that the differences between our country and the Boer could have been easily settled at a negotiation table, but for some gentlemen with strong influence in the mining industry and the Government, greed and profit were more important than a civilized agreement. The intransigent demands of our officials led the Boer to desperation, and eventually they declared war on Britain. I suppose that they thought that, after some months of fighting, our Government would decide that the campaign was too costly, and finally we would sign a treaty. But that was not going to happen. The gold mines in the Boer territory, to the eyes of Mr Rhodes and Mr Phillips, were well worth the resources of the Crown and the lives of thousands of good British soldiers.

So the Army had to be sent to solve a problem that others had created. I sailed from Gibraltar with the 3rd battalion of the Grenadier Guards on 25th October 1899, and we arrived in Cape Town about three weeks later. I returned to the land where my life as a soldier had started, twenty years back. As our ship approached Table Bay, my mind was assaulted by many remembrances of my past battles, as well as by the impatience that I always feel when a new fight is imminent.

This time I was appointed to the Guards Brigade, which was part of Lord Methuen's 1st Infantry Division. Our orders were to relieve the town of Kimberley, that was being besieged by the Boer. On November 21st we started our advance from Orange River Bridge and the following day we found a very strong Boer position at the hills near Belmont railway station. Lord Methuen ordered our brigade to advance on Gun Hill during the night, thus outflanking the Boer lines. But due to our defective maps, at next day's dawn we found ourselves short of the enemy lines instead.

(from the memoirs of Lt. Gen. Bruce W. Dickinson)

Victory conditions:
-Take all the VHs.
- Your MSU core unit must survive.

Special note: 

- The terrain is somewhat rough. Remember this if you buy transports for your units.






