Landrecies

August 25th, 1914

Everyone still remembers how the Great War started. In June 1914 the heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne was murdered by a fanatic who had Serbian support. Austro-Hungary threatened Serbia with war, and Russia threatened Austro-Hungary. And then Germany, making the greatest misjudgement of any country in contemporay history, declared war on Russia, France and Belgium, forcing us to intervene. The Germans actually believed that they could have an easy victory over France, just like in 1870, that we would soon lose interest in a war in the Continent, and that before the end of the year they would have free rein to fight Russia with the help of Austria-Hungary.

In our country we had already formed a British Expeditionary Force under the command of Sir John French. I was to lead the 2nd Division of Douglas Haig's I Corps. Mi sons Michael and William were sent to Smith-Dorrien's II Corps. On August 9th we proceeded to France, the stations full of flags and "Rule Britannia". After a fast march through northern France, on August 22nd we reached Mons, in Belgium. The next day the II Corps was heavily engaged against the advancing German Army. Our soldiers fought like true British lions, but the German attack was too strong and we had to retreat to new defensive lines. We retreated to Landrecies and the II Corps to Le Cateau, on our left flank.

From Landrecies we should go to Étreux and then further south to Laon and Soissons. But we couldn't retreat too fast, lest we leave the II Corp's right flank unprotected. Besides, some French units were using the same roads for their own retreat, so an excessive haste on our part could have disatrous consequences. I decided that holding the pursuing Germans for a few hours was the best option.

(from the memoirs of Lt. Gen. Bruce W. Dickinson)

Victory conditions:
-After 8 turns you must hold 3 VHs for a BV, 2 VHs for a V and 1 VH for a TacV.
- Your MSU core unit must survive.

Special note:
- Your newly purchased units will start with 99 exp from now on.

