Hohenzollern Redoubt

October 8th, 1915

In January 1915 I returned to active service and was assigned to Haig's staff, but although I found it a remarkable experience, I still longed for a divisional command. I asked for it repeatedly, until in August they offered me command of the newly formed Guards Division, composed of battalions taken from the different Guards regiments. I have no words to express my joy for having been granted the privilege of leading these most extraordinary men to battle.

The baptism of fire of the Guards Division came at the battle of Loos, a new attempt to break the German lines that started in autum. As a part of the XI Corps we were at the Army reserve, so after our first line broke through the German defences in the morning of September 25th we should have followed it as fast as possible in order to widen the gap. But our communications system was so slow that when our orders finally came and we moved to the front line, the German reserves had been mobilized and the opportunity had been lost. Our divisions kept on attacking the German positions for three weeks, but without any significative result.

In the first hours of our offensive I already knew what would happen, so I decided to adopt small-scale tactics. Since a breakthrough was impossible, I would be content with taking valuable positions located near the front line. After that, my men would dig in and resist the predictable German counterattacks, so we could wear our enemies down with relatively little losses. 

On September 27th we used those tactics at the Chalk Pit Wood sector with some success, so a few days later we were ordered to go to the North and replace the 28th Division facing the Hohenzollern Redoubt, a series of fortifications and trenches near Auchy-les-Mines where the Germans had gathered nearly three infantry divisions and dozens of artillery pieces. Our mission was to repell the German counterattacks and, if possible, recover some of the defensive perimeter.

(from the memoirs of Lt. Gen. Bruce W. Dickinson)

Victory conditions:
-After 12 turns you must hold 4 VHs for a BV, 3 VHs for a V and 1 VH for a TacV.
- Your MSU core unit must survive.

Intelligence report: A German assault is imminent. Don't go to the offensive too soon.

Special note: In this scenario the "skip first player turn" option is activated.


