Choice: The old warrior reflects on the new warfare

September, 1912

In 1912 I started making plans for my retirement. Evelyn and I had bought a beautiful house in the country, not far from Norwich, where we intended to spend our last years after all our sons and daughters had left our old home; Michael, Christine and Margaret were married and they had already given us seven grandchildren, Thomas had been ordained a priest at the diocese of East Anglia, and William was studying in Cambridge. 

I had decided that I would leave the Army in 1916, when I turned sixty, but until then I was determined to serve my country with all my strength. And at that moment that meant studying as hard as when I was a cadet. Those were turbulent times in Europe: Germany was following an aggressive and expansionist foreign policy, and it was only a matter of time before they clashed with Russia or France. When that happened, Britain coud be forced to intervene, with unpredictable consequences.

Since the war against the Boer I was aware that frontal infantry assaults against an entrenched enemy equipped with modern weapons would be costly and ultimately futile. So there I was, an old man studying, trying to find an alternative to the old methods.

I had hopes that the new airplanes could be useful at spotting the enemy troops, and maybe neutralizing their rear guard. Artillery was also an obvious choice against trenches and fortified positions, but in order to be effective, guns had to follow the advance of the infantry and provide cover fire at any given time, and that was only possible with highly experienced crews. And of course specialized infantry, like our Royal Engineers, could have an essential role in trench warfare. In fact there were too many theories and little experience in real battles, so despite all my efforts I was far from finding a definitive answer.

(from the memoirs of Lt. Gen. Bruce W. Dickinson)

Scenario conditions:

This is a choice scenario. Depending on what you choose, different units will be added to your core.
- If you select the Northolt airfield, you'll get a bomber unit.
- If you choose the Royal Artillery Barracks, you'll get an artillery unit.
- If you opt for the Wellington Barracks, you'll get two infantry units.