Although everything was lost for them, the Germans kept on fighting until the Armistice was signed on November 11th. It was a total defeat for them, and a cruel and bitter victory for the British Empire, badly weakened as a result of the war, and that has never fully recovered.
Somehow, a part of the British soul disappeared in the trenches of Ypres, the Somme and Cambrai. The glorious era that I knew when I was young is gone forever. Once, we were the light that illuminated the world. Now, we are incapable of responding to the challenges of our modern times.

I am talking as an eccentric old man, and maybe that is all that is left of me. I retired from the Army before the end of 1918, and Evelyn and I could move (at last!) to our country house in Norwich. Since then, I have spent most of the time with my family, in the church, in my library, or in my garden. I have seldom moved more than 20 miles away from home in 18 years. My wife says that, obviously, my true vocation was being a hermit.

But despite that, for some reason, I have not been forgotten. For some, I am the living legend, Bruce "The African", the hero from better times. For others, I am an old fossil that should be on display at the British Museum, next to the Egyptian mummies. 

I did not care about these opinions. I have never spoken in public about my war memories. Even my family wonders why. The reason is simple. I always thought that those memories were private, and belonged to me alone.

That changed some months ago, when I discovered the horrifying nonsense that my great-grandson Luke is being taught at school. I can not hide from the world, after all. If I do not tell Luke how I lived, he will have to learn the lies of others. So I started these memoirs as a last act of service that could help the young British understand their past. That way they will be able to avoid our mistakes, while feeling pride for our good decisions. I am tired, and I will not walk on this Earth for much longer but, with God's help, I hope that I have accomplished my last mission.

(from the memoirs of Lt. Gen. Bruce W. Dickinson)

The campaign is over, I hope you have liked it. Thanks for playing!

Urica, 2013-2014