Kufit - Sep 23rd, 1885

"And there went out another horse that was red: and power was given to him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another: and there was given unto him a great sword"
Rev. 6, 4

When I heard, in 1881, that a rebellion had started in Sudan against the Egyptian rule, I thought that it would be crushed in a few weeks. I was terribly wrong. The rebel leader was a Muslim cleric known as the Mahdi, who preached the most fanatical form of Islam that I've ever known. It was worse than anything that I had seen in Morocco, in Algeria, in Egypt, or anywhere. But, very soon, the Sudanese tribes, resentful after decades of Egyptian oppression, saw the Mahdi as a holy prophet who would liberate the land and renew the Islamic faith. They started to defeat the Egyptian garrisons in a series of battles and, two years later, they controlled most of Sudan and were powerful enough to annihilate am army of 10,000 Egyptian soldiers at El Obeid. It didn't matter that their commander was an English colonel.

After El Obeid, the British started to worry. Egypt was a British protectorate since 1882, and the Mahdist War was a problem you didn't expect. Many Egyptian forces were trapped in forts of small towns and, if they didn't receive any relief, the Mahdist would eventually exterminate them. The British didn't have the resources to evacuate all of those garrisons, so they asked Emperor Yohannes for help.

And that's how, on 3 June 1884, the United Kingdon and Ethiopia signed the Treaty of Adwa, and our war with Egypt officially ended. We would help to evacuate the Egyptian garrisons from Keren to Kassala and Gallabat, something that Yohannes had demanded for almost ten years. In return, Ethiopia would finally recover Bogos and, even more important, we could use the port of Massawa, even for importing arms.

It could have been a great agreement but, as you know, for all its wealth and power, your country has always been a land of bandits and pirates, and always will be. If you betrayed your God just to follow the whim of a lecherous king, could anyone expect that you honoured the promises that you made to Emperor Yohannes? As soon as the Egyptians were successfully evacuated, and just four months after the signature of the treaty, your government broke it, and encouraged Italy to take Massawa. 

So, due to your betrayal, we were denied the access to the Red Sea, and we had two new powerful enemies. Furious with us for having helped the Egyptians, the Mahdist invaded our lands, forcing the people to choose between conversion to Islam or death. Acting again as a champion of Christianity, Yohannes raised a new army, and sent Ras Alula and me to repel the Sudanese invasion. After resting in Keren for ten days, and knowing that the Muslims were camped in Kufit, near Agordat, we headed there, ready to battle.

Victory conditions: 
Take all the VHs.