Amba Alagi - Dec 7th, 1895

"So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness: and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet coloured beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns "
Rev. 17,3

Less than two months after the battle of Metemma, Emperor Menelik II signed the Treaty of Wuchale with the Italians, their old allies. In exchange for the assistance of Italy in issues related to Ethiopian financial, military and foreign affairs, Ethiopia would cede the northern provinces of Bogos, Hamasien, Akkele Guzay, and Serae to Italy. Those territories were to becme part of the new colony of Eritrea.

Giving up those lands, for which Yohannes IV and so many Ethiopians had fought and died in the recent past, was a clever political move of Menelik. Yohannes had belonged to the Tigrayan tribe, as well as Ras Alula and many of his most trusted counselors. Under the clauses of the Treaty of Wuchale, the majority of the Tigrayans would remain under the rule of Italy in the colony of Eritrea, beyond the new borders of Ethiopia. The Ethiopian Tigrayans would be very few, not numerous enough to be a serious threat for Menelik. Thus, the new emperor was making sure that he would reign over a united, cohesive empire. The time of the aristocratic conspiracies and rebellions would be over.

But something strange happened during the signature of the treaty. The text of the article 17 wasn't the same in the Italian and the Ahmaric versions. The text that Menelik signed just said that Ethiopia could conduct its foreign affairs through the Italians. According to the version that the Italian delegate signed, Ethiopia had the obligation to do so. In practice, that second version of the treaty established an Italian protectorate over Ethiopia.

Menelik rejected the treaty as soon as he discovered the scam, and then the Italians accused him of violating its clauses. They threatened Menelik with war, and sent troops to Eritrea. In the meantime, Russia was the only country that believed and supported Ethiopia, and sent us arms, ammunition and military advisors.

Finally, in December 1894 the Italians invaded the Ethiopian region of Tigray. Putting all our past differences aside, Ras Alula, Tekle Haymanot, Ras Mengesha and myself, along with many other noblemen, assured Menelik that we would fight for his side.
Initially, things didn't go well for us. Ras Mengesha was defeated at Coatit in January 1895. The Italians followed their advance, and Menelik had to raise a massive army of nearly 200,000 men.

Our first opportunity to react came in December 1895, when we attacked one the forward Italian positions, at the mountain of Amba Alagi. Due to its isolated location, it would be difficult for our enemies to send any reinforcements, so if we were fast, we could overcome the Italian defenders.

Victory conditions: 
Take all the VHs.