1875-1919 THE LION OF JUDAH

Version: 1.0
Equipment File: Kaiser General
Number of Scenarios: 16
Player Country: Abyssinia
Campaign Designer: Urica
Playtesters: Urica

Abyssinian campaign, 1875-1896 (historical) and 1916-1919 (fictional)

"Write the things which thou hast seen, and the things which are, and the things which shall be hereafter"
Rev. 1, 19

Come here, young man. I've read the stories that you wrote about that British officer who became a Chinese general, and I must say that I've really enjoyed them. It seems that you are an expert in finding and interviewing crazy Europeans who are serving exotic kings, aren't you? Well, you have come to the proper place, then.

Your readers should know that my name is Andrés Martínez Regos. I was born in Northern Spain in 1840, to a very large family. Although my parents did their best, it was impossible to raise so many children, so I joined the army when I was very young. I turned out to be a good soldier, and when the war with Morocco started, I was already a sergeant. I fought at the Castillejos and Tetouan, but I was badly wounded there. The doctors could save my leg but, as you see, I became lame for the rest of my life.

After we won the war I had to spend some time in Ceuta, recovering from my wound. My career in the Spanish army was over, and I realised that, with my sick leg, it would be very difficult to go back home and work as a farmer. At least I still knew how to fight with my fists, so eventually I became a bodyguard for many European businessmen who wished to invest in Northern Africa, but were too scared of the natives. 

My life changed during one of my travels to Egypt, in 1872. I was accompanying a French gentleman who acquired ancient pieces of art, by not totally legal means, and sent them to several European museums and private collectors. A few months after our arrival, we were approached by a couple of men who worked for the Coptic Orthodox Church. They had been secretly gathering a large amount of rifles and ammunition for their Abyssinian brethren, and offered us a great sum of money if we managed to smuggle them into the ancient, hermit kingdom of Ethiopia. The offer was too tempting to reject it, but the mission was too dangerous, so I should personally carry it out. And that's how I arrived in Ethiopia or, as you call it, Abyssinia, in 1873. 

The journey to Mekele lasted seventeen months. You wouldn't believe how many perils my men and I had to overcome, how many difficulties we had to endure, or how many times I was about to die, but we finally arrived with the cargo. I was amazed when, just one day after my arrival, Emperor Yohannes IV ordered me to present myself before Him.
I was pleasantly surprised by the personality of the Emperor. I was expecting a murderous, ignorant savage. What I found was a clever, devout and resolute man, deeply concerned by the future of his kingdom and his subjects. He was well aware that, surrounded by Muslim kingdoms and with a growing European interest in the lands of the Horn of Africa, Ethiopia could only survive by abandoning the old medieval ways and becoming a modern state. Yohannes knew that the Ethiopians couldn't achieve that goal without the help of European advisors.

The reform of the army was one of the changes that Yohannes had in mind. As soon as he learnt that I was a veteran soldier, he decided to offer me that task. I would become his personal military advisor, I would live in the court, and I would have wealth and servants.
I missed my old days in the army and, let's admit it, I was overcome by greed. So I accepted the King's offer, and that's how I became an Abyssinian general. Now hear the rest of my story.