After a fierce fighting Gondar was saved, and the Sudanese retreated to Gallabat. Wisely, Emperor Yohannes thought that they would attack again as soon as they could, so he ordered King Menelik to send his army to Gojjam and Gondar, in order to reinforce those areas. However, unbeknownst to Yohannes, Menelik and Tekle Haymanot saw this as an opportunity to forge an alliance.

As soon as Gojjam and Gondar were safe, Menelik returned to Shewa. Some weeks later, in September, a weak Sudanese force invaded western Gojjam. Emperor Yohannes quickly sent his army in order to repel this new threat and, amazingly, Tekle Haymanot refused to help the Emperor. Now that he believed that Menelik had grown stronger, Tekle Haymanot would rather see his own kingdom destroyed than risk his alliance with the Shewans.

Yohannes had been very patient for more than ten years. Following the advice of the Tewahedo Church, he had restrained himself for the sake of avoiding a civil war and fighting against the Muslim enemies of Ethiopia, but Tekle Haymanot's betrayal was the last straw for Yohannes. As soon as the Sudanese fled, we attacked the king's army and laid waste to much of Gojjam. Some said that our punishment was even worse than the Mahdists's pillages. We didn't stop until Tekle Haymanot submitted again to Yohannes.

Menelik was going to be the next recipient of Yohannes's rage, but once again the clergy managed to calm him down. The Emperor was a devout Christian, so he understood that defeating the Sudanese was a priority. Besides, while we were campaigning in Gojjam, Menelik had finally engaged the Mahdists forces, achieving a fine victory in Gute Dili. The Sudanese had been foolish enough to invade the Southwest of the country, which was part of Menelik's territory. This time his own lands were at risk, so he had to take the initiative and, indirectly, help the cause of his Emperor.

So, in the end, Yohannes decided to forgive Menelik and give him one last chance. And, since the Sudanese were weakened, he decided to launch a final offensive against the Mus-lim menace. He was determined to liberate Ethiopia from the Mohammedan invaders, once and for all. When the year 1889 came, all of his officers were ready to march against Gallabat. That campaign would change the history of Ethiopia forever, but not the way that we expected.
