Tembien - Nov 16th, 1916

"My son, do not forget my teaching, but let your heart keep my commandments: for length of days and years of life and peace they will add to you"
Prov. 3, 1- 2

Ha, it's great to finally meet you! My late father liked it when you interviewed him in 1906. Until the day he died, he considered one of his friends.

It's been a long time since 1906, isn't it? Twenty years! Lots of things have happened in these turbulent times. Let me tell you that I'm sorry about all the troubles that have happened in England. The British Revolution was an absolute tragedy. Thank God that you managed to leave the country.

So now your new readers in Canada want to hear about me, Dejazmach Daniel Andarawus of Tigray. Well, we won't disappoint them, will we?

First of all, let them know that, no matter what you may have heard, when the Great War started Ethiopia's only wish was to remain neutral. The strife in Europe had nothing to do with us. Certainly, Lij Iyasu V had a soft spot for the Ottoman Empire and Islamic religion, but he would never have entered the war on the side of the Central Powers. 

Besides, since the Tewahedo Church and much of the aristocracy disliked Iyasu's policies, we deposed him on 27 September 1916 in favour of his aunt, Empress Zauditu, Menelik's eldest daughter. We had the cooperation from the British ambassador, and it seemed that our neutrality was assured.

Sadly, almost at the same time, in our northern border there was a quarrel between different clans of Ethiopian and Eritrean Tigrayans. The quarrel led to a riot, and there were some dead in both sides. Then the Italians sent a platoon of ascaris to restore order and, unfortunately, the Ethiopian rioters attacked them and killed some of them, too.
It was a regretful, although minor, incident, but Italy immediately saw it as a golden opportunity to avenge its defeat at Adwa and annex Ethiopia once and for all. The Italians thought that, since they were part of the Entente powers, the British would be forced to support them, tacitly at least. And they were right.

So, on October 20, the Italian government sent Empress Zauditu an insulting ultimatum, in unacceptable terms. What they really wanted was a pretext for a war, since they thought that this time they would win easily. Just a few days later, they invaded my land of Tigray. Their colonial forces quickly took Adwa and Adigrat, but I was waiting for them a few miles from there, near Mekele.

Victory conditions: 
Take all the VHs.