The Sudanese fought like true fanatics and, in the end, we had to retire. However, their losses had been very high, too, and they had to finish their campaign and return to Kassala, in Sudanese territory. The invasion was over, and Ethiopia would be calm for a while.

However, the war against Sudan was going to be a long one, and it would consume Yohannes in the last years of his reign. He would receive very little help from Menelik of Shewa who, thanks to his deals with the Italians in Harar, had a permanent supply of modern arms and was expanding his kingdom to Ogaden, in the east, and to the lands south of the Blue Nile. As long as the Mahdists weren't a direct menace for his Shewan kingdom, he wouldn't get involved in the war.

That meant that, one more time, Yohannes would have to fight with his most loyal troops, who belonged to the tribes that dwelt in Tigray, Gondar, Gojjam and Wolo. That could be enough to deal with the Sudanese, or maybe with the Italians, but not with both of them at the same time.

I've thought many times about the British treason, and now I believe that they never had the intention of allowing Ethiopia access to the sea. I doubt that Egypt would have dared to invade Bogos in 1875 without the knowledge, and the tacit permission, of some powerful English officials. After the opening of the Suez Canal, you needed an allied country in charge of the main ports of the route. It had to be a weak nation, too, or else France and Germany would have opposed you. Egypt was perfect for that task, but the British Empire didn't expect that two savage nations would defeat them. What other options did you have? Give Massawa to the Ethiopians? You consider them a bunch of savages. Too weak and unreliable. So, as soon as the Italians showed some interest, you invited them to occupy part of the coast of the Red Sea. That was always the plan. You played with the people who adopted me, you used tem and, later, you betrayed them and forsook them. I'll never forgive that.
