Gundet - Nov 16th, 1875

"I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name "
Rev. 3, 8

After the Suez Canal opened in 1869, Egypt sought to take control of the Red Sea coast. As part of his plan, in 1872 Khedive Ismail ordered the occupation of Bogos, a region that Yohannes IV regarded as part of Ethiopia. The Emperor tried to solve the crisis peaceably, and sent John Kirkham, a Scottish adventurer at the service of Ethiopia, to different European countries, looking for some kind of diplomatic support. However, everything was in vain. Nobody took the Ethiopian emissary seriously.

In October 1875 the Egyptian forces invaded Hamasien, a tributary of the Ethiopian Empire. The Egyptian army was well equipped, and possessed some artillery pieces. Besides, it was commanded by a Danish officer, Soren Arendrup. 

The loss of Hamasien would have been a terrible blow for Yohannes, whose capital was located just a few miles away from that territory, so he quickly mobilized an army in order to fight against the Egyptian invaders. Yohannes and the priests of the Orthodox Tewahedo Church convinced the hastily recruited levies of the importance of defeating the Muslim army that wanted to conquer Ethiopia, so although just one third of our warriors had rifles, the morale was extremely good. After all, it was a war between Christianity and the heathens. As long as our warriors had faith, God would help us.

In the upcoming battle I'd serve under the orders of Alula Engida, a brash and extremely cunning chieftain, who was a close friend of Yohannes since their childhood years, despite the fact that Alula had been born in a peasant family. 

In his way towards Adwa and Mekele, the Egyptians had taken Adi Quala, in the highlands above the Mareb River. On November 14th Alula and his men crossed the river, quickly outflanking the Egyptians. We didn't attack immediately, but took positions on the mountains and waited for our enemies to fall into our trap. 

Two days later Emperor Yohannes crossed the Mareb with the remaining Ethiopian forces, blocking the advance of Sorendrup and his men. The fight started near the village of Gundet, and then Alula ordered us to charge against the Egyptians.

Victory conditions: 
Take all the VHs