Gura - Mar 7th, 1876

"And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified"
Rev. 11, 8

Just a few months after the battle of Gundet, the Egyptians invaded Hamasien again, this time with a much larger army. Our enemies were commanded by Mohammed Ratib Pasha, and among his officers there were a few former Confederate veterans, including General Loring. 

In January, the invaders arrived in the plains of Gura, where they quickly built two forts. They also bribed Ras Wolde Mikael into betraying Emperor Yohannes. Sadly, Ethiopia seemed to be still in Medieval times, when many different nobles challenged the authority of their king as soon as they perceived that on doing so they could gather more power for themselves. In fact, the main threat for Yohannes's crown wasn't, at that time, the Egyptian army, but King Menelik of Shewa, who still aspired to become Emperor, and was always defiant to the authority of Yohannes.

The Emperor called us to war again, a Holy War between Christians and Muslims, and we quickly sent our troops to the battle. It wouldn't be as easy as in Gundet, though. This time the Egyptians were very prudent. They refused to leave the protection of their forts. Alula Engida tried to assault them, but he had to retreat after losing thousands of warriors in the attacks. Our army simply didn't have the means to take strong fortified positions.

However, Loring understood that the Egyptians couldn't remain in the forts forever. If they did, we'd eventually cut their supply lines, and they'd be forced to surrender or, at the very least, to cancel the offensive and retreat to the coast. So in the first days of March he forced Mohammed Ratib Pasha to leave the safety of Fort Gura and try to search and destroy our forces. 

The Egyptians were really scared. They would have skipped the battle if they had had the chance, but they couldn't do that. On the other hand, our morale was quite low, too. Knowing this, Emperor Yohannes pierced our waterskins and said: "My children, if you don't want to die of thirst, you'll have to take the water from your enemies". Then all of us knew that the die was cast. We charged against our enemies. Only victory or death would await us. As soon as the Egyptians saw us, they quickly set up a defensive position on the shore of a dry riverbed, and we tried to storm it.

Victory conditions: 
Destroy 14 enemy MSUs (there are a total of 22).