Yohannes IV, the Great, His Imperial Majesty, Conquering Lion of the Tribe of Judah, King of Zion, King of Kings of Ethiopia and Elect of God, died in battle fighting against the Muslim hordes, just as he had wished. An honourable death for the greatest emperor that Ethiopia had had in centuries.

Although Ras Alula and the other Ethiopian chieftains tried to hide Yohannes's death from the Mahdists and from our own warriors, it was in vain. As soon as our men knew that their emperor had died, most of them panicked and fled the battlefield. The Sudanese counter-attacked, and a battle that was going extremely well turned into a terrible defeat for us.

In fact, it was even worse than that. Some days later, a group of Mahdists ambushed and defeated, at the Atbara River, the small Ethiopian detachment that was carrying the corpse of Yohannes. The Mahdists captured the body of the dead Emperor, whose head they cut off and sent back to Omdurman as a trophy.

Before dying, Yohannes had made us swear that we would support his illegitimate son, Ras Mengesha, as his successor. Yes, don't look me like that. Yohannes IV had a natural son. I've said that he was deeply religious, not that he was immune to sin. And it's very common, among the Ethiopian noblemen, to have one or several mistresses.

However, that oath was impossible to fulfill. Ras Mengesha was just 21 years old. He was too young to hold the title of Emperor. He lacked the experience, or the strength, to govern the different Ethiopian kingdoms, or to subdue all the Ethiopian nobles. Without unity, it would be impossible to defend the country from the depredations of the Sudanese, the Italians, or the British. No, Ras Mengesha couldn't be our emperor.

In fact, there was only one realistic option. With Yohannes dead, only one Ethiopian noble had the power, and the prestige, to lead the country. It was no other than Menelik, the old rival of Yohannes. Menelik II was soon and unanimously recognized as the new Negusa Negest.

As for the Mahdists, they never invaded Ethiopia again. Many of their best soldiers had died in the battle, seriously weakening their military strength. In the following years, they just dared to make some small-scale raids near the border. At the same time, Britain and Italy increased their military pressure against Sudan, and that would lead to the final defeat of the Mahdists at Omdurman in 1898. But don't forget that Ethiopia played a very important role in the Mahdist War. Without our little known efforts and sacrifices, it would have been extremely difficult for Britain and Egypt to ever recover Sudan.