1918 - Sailors revolt

No one still wants war, but the government does not get it. It sends the German fleet into the final battle against the Royal Navy. Your comrades defend themselves. This means mutiny. The ships turned back. The mutineers, however, were captured ...
Your comrades need help. Karl Artelt and Lothar Popp, leader of the revolt and USPD members, stand by your side. Go in and win!! 

Note: The Steinhäuser Patrol is on the way to knock down the revolt ...

Historical:
The fleet had been moved from Kiel to Wilhelmshaven to set from there sail to the last battle. Despite utmost secrecy the plans came through to the crews.
Thereupon the sailors on three ships of the Third Naval Battle Squadron refused to weigh anchor for the last naval battle of WW1.
Part of the crew of SMS Thüringen and SMS Helgoland, two battle ships of the First Naval Battle Squadron, committed outright mutiny and sabotage. However, when a day later some torpedo boats directed their cannons onto these ships, the mutineers gave up and were led away without any resistance.
The fleet again entered Kiel. 47 sailors were arrested and detained at the naval base 'Wilhelm Souchon'.
Some 250 sailors met in the evening of 1 November in the Union House in Kiel and prevented the fleet from setting sail again. 
The Revolution started from here with the sailor Karl Artelt and shipyard worker Lothar Popp (both USPD) as ringleaders.
The next day, police closed the Union House. Several thousand sailors and workers moved to the "Großer Exerzierplatz" (large drill ground). Under the slogan: "peace and bread" they demanded the release of the mutineers.
On 4 November the governor of the naval base, Wilhelm Souchon, gave way and let the detained sailors free. However, foreign troops marched on to defeat the movement.
These were intercepted by the rebels, captured, or joined the uprising.
On the evening of 4 November's Kiel was firmly in the hands of about 40,000 rebellious sailors, soldiers and workers.

Author = Matze (M. Kessler)















































