Gefechte von Missunde

Feb 2nd, 1864

Since the Middle Ages the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein had been joined in personal union with the Crown of Denmark, as was the Duchy of Lauenburg after the Napoleonic wars.
The union of the three duchies, which had a large German population, became increasingly difficult in the second half of the XIX century. Most of the Germans opposed the liberal and democratic reforms that the Danish government wished to apply. Besides, the Germans in Schleswig and Holstein supported the Salic law, so they wouldn't accept as a duke any descendant of the King of Denmark who belonged to female family lines. 
That dinastic issue became a great problem when Christian VIII of Denmark died in 1848. His heir, Frederik VII, was childless, so after him the House of Oldenburg bould become extinct. According to the Danish laws, the crown would pass to Christian, a descendant of one of the daughters of Frederik V of Denmark, and also a member of the House of Glücksburg. Coming from a female family line, this was unacceptable for the Germans in Schleswig, Holstein and Lauenburg.

Between 1848 and 1852 there was a war between Denmark and the German states that supported the claims of the Germans who lived under the rule of the personal union. In the end the Danes managed to keep the integrity of the Danish federation, and the duchies remained as independent entities. However, the peace didn't last long. Frederik VII died in 1863, just when the Danish government was working on a new constitution for Denmark and Schleswig, that would create a joint parliament to govern the common affairs of both territories. Christian IX of Glücksburg, the new king, signed the constitution on November 18.

Quickly, the German states occupied Lauenburg and Holstein. On January 16, 1864, Austria and Prussia agreed to occupy Schleswig, too. However, Denmark refused to abolish the November Constitution. Finally, the war started on February 1, 1864, when Austrian and Prussian forces crossed the Eider into Schleswig.

The initial Danish strategy was to take positions at the Danevirke, a series of trenches and fortifications that protected Southern Jutland. One day after the war started, the Prussians tried to break through and outflank the eastern flank of the Danevirke at Missunde, where the Schlei was extemely narrow and it would be easy to cross.

Victory conditions:
- Take all the VHs