Langensalza

Jun 27th, 1866

In 1866 the Austrians finally gave Bismarck an excuse for war. Both countries disagreed about the way that Schleswig and Holstein should be administered after the war against Denmark. Prussia wanted to annex the duchies or, at the very least, Schleswig, while Austria wished either a condominium or the creation of a new independent country with Duke Friedrich VIII as head of state.

In 1865 Austria and Prussia signed the Gastein Convention, according to which the idea of a condominium was rejected, Prussia would control Schleswig and Lauenburg, and Austria would govern over Holstein. The treaty was very good for the Prussian interests, but it didn't solve the concerns of the Austrians who, on 1 June 1866, asked the German Diet for a resolution on the status of Holstein.

Prussia denounced this as a hostile Austrian act and, just nine days later, invaded Holstein. The Austro-Prussian War had started.

In fact, Bismarck had been preparing the war with Austria for years. He had already secured an alliance with Italy and the neutrality of Britain, Russia and France. Besides, the Prussian army had better weapons and better organisation, and more access to railroads, which meant that it could be mobilized faster than the Austrian forces.

All of those factors meant that, although the most powerful German states (Bavaria, Saxony, Hanover, Baden or Württemberg) supported Austria and went to war against Prussia, and that Austria and her allies had numerical superiority over their enemies, they were forced to fight in several fronts, allowing Prussia to defeat them in detail. To make things even worse for Austria and her allies, they lacked an unified command, and some of their generals didn't have the initiative and the wits that the situation required.

While the majority of the Prussian troops headed against the Austrian army, some regiments stayed in Central Germany, invading and subduing other enemy states. The Army of the Kingdom of Hanover, knowing that they couldn't resist the Prussians if they fought alone, tried to flee to the south, where they could join the Bavarian forces. However, the Prussians were faster and, by the end of June, the Hanoverians were surrounded by enemy units on all sides. Defeating the small Prussian contingent in the town of Langensalza, in the west, was their last hope to break free and join the Bavarians.

Victory conditions:
- Take all the VHs