As soon as the Qing Army controlled Tientsin my father in law sent most of our troops to the coast, to harass the foreign soldiers and prevent them from launching a new offensive against Peking. In the meantime a small, but experienced and extremely loyal group of veterans marched on the capital, and there they gave the Yihetuan forces the same treatment that their comrades had received in Tientsin. In a few days the Yihetuan uprising was under control, the order was restored and the foreign legations were freed by our own Chinese forces.

The government did nothing against us. My father in law had proved that the Qing Army was all that the Empire needed against the foreign aggressions. Militias like the Yihetuan were unnecessary and, even worse, harmful to the Chinese interests. My father in law convinced Empress Dowager Cixi that the Yihetuan had to be forbidden, all of its leaders arrested or executed and its members punished.

Seeing that China was a tougher enemy than they had previously thought, that the legations crisis had been solved and that the Yihetuan had been outlawed, most foreign nations agreed to negotiate with the Qing Empire. China really wanted to stablish good relations with the United Kingdom, Germany, France and all the Western powers, but the Chinese demanded to be treated as equals. The time of the invasions, the ultimatums, the territorial concessions and the unequal treaties was over. China was a sovereign country and wouldn't tolerate any new foreign interference in its internal affairs. As a proof of its good intentions, the Chinese goverment would indemnify the victims of the Yihetuan and would grant the safety of the christians and their right to express their beliefs. After some weeks of tense negotiations, most countries agreed to those terms and retired their troops.

Only Russia refused. During the uprising Siberian and Cossack units had occupied most of Manchuria, and they obviously wanted to annex that region. So the Qing Army woud have to fight one last campaign before China could have peace. 

