Although we couldn't stop the French from relieving Tuyen Quang, when the news of the French retreat from Lang Son reached Paris there were riots in the streets. The laicist-colonialist government of Jules Ferry fell on 30 March, and his successor promptly signed a peace treaty with China. According to the Treaty of Tientsin China recognised the French protectorate over Annam and Tonkin, but at least didn't have to pay any war reparations. From the Chinese point of view the war had been fought to a stalemate, and that had an outstanding effect on the rebirth of China's national pride.

My patron was acclaimed as the main architect of the good performance of the Chinese soldiers. He was ordered to move to Peking, where he was given the task of modernising the land forces in all of China. He was extremely happy with my services, so he offered me to become his permanent military advisor, as well as the hand of Meiying, his youngest illegitimate daughter. That was an immense honour, specially for a foreigner like me. But my father in law was a very clever man. He knew that if I accepted, I would stay in China forever. I could never return to Britain with an Asian wife. I would never see my country again.

Sometimes I still wonder why I stayed. Of course, I've become a respected and rich man. Meiying is a precious woman who has never showed any discontent about my occasional lovers. In fact, she seems happy that my affairs are scarce and short-lived, and that I've never taken any permanent concubines or fathered  illegitimate children. She says that I'm a more considerate husband than most Chinese men.

But those weren't the reasons. I stayed because, in Tonkin, I had the impression that I was living the beginning of a great change in history. China had been a powerful country, a mighty dragon, but for many years that dragon had been postrated, as if it was the victim of a magical sleep. In Tonkin I convinced myself that the dragon was awakening, and that soon we'll see its power again. I didn't know how that adventure would end, but I wanted to be there when it happened.














