Seymour Expedition

Jun 10th, 1900

Among the many secrets societies that appeared in China in the XIX century, one of the strongest, and certainly the most infamous, was the Yihetuan, that is, the "Fists of Patriotic Union", called the "Boxers" outside China for the proficiency that many of its members showed in the combat without weapons. It was a group of violent, anti-foreigner and anti-christian fanatics that started their criminal activities in 1897. Although the Qing Army defeated them in some battles, they earned the sympathy of many powerful Imperial officials and many common people, tired of the constant meddling of the Western countries in the Chinese internal affairs. So the Yihetuan quickly gained new members, and their attacks became more frequent and more lethal.

In 1900 the riots transformed into a full-scale uprising which wanted to "revive the Qing and destroy the foreigners". The government ceased to pursue the members of the Yihetuan and started to defend them. I didn't like those measures and, for my part, I gave safe-conduct passes to as many threatened families as I could, so that they could travel to Russia or Korea, where they would be safe. Others took refuge in my Peking mansion, where Meiying was bearing our seventh, and last, child. She was having some health problems at that time, so I feared that taking so many strangers in  could worsen her condition, but amazingly it had quite the opposite effect.

But there was very little that a single man could do. Many christians, mostly Chinese natives, were murdered. Arson, looting and all kinds of depravity were so common that the foreign diplomats, fearing for their lives, requested the presence of Western soldiers in the Peking legations. The petition was granted, and the deployment of the defence forces started in June. But it was too late for peace. On June 11, after some Germans executed a member of the Yihetuan, thousands of rioters, as well as the Kansu Braves, an elite unit of muslim Qing soldiers, stormed Peking burning, looting and murdering. Soon the foreign diplomats, along with some Chinese servants, local christians and a handful of soldiers, were surrounded in the legations by thousands of violent enemies.

It was then when we knew that, just the day before, a multi-national relief force, commanded by Admiral Seymour, was heading to Peking to liberate the foreign legations and crush the uprising of the Yihetuan. Although I understood the reasons behind that decision, that was an act of war against the country that I had been serving for more that 15 years, so I sent my troops to stop Seymour. As much as I despised the Yihetuan, my duty was to defend China against the foreign enemies.

Victory conditions:

- Take all the VHs.
