Until we finally entered Kazan, I didn't fully understand the brilliance of Kappel's strategy. With just a handful of soldiers, we had inflicted the Bolsheviks thousands of casualties, mostly prisoners. But that was only a minimal part of the uncountable effects of our victory: To begin with, all the staff and the cadets od the Kazan Military Academy joined our side. The workers of the factories at Izhevsk and Votkinsk raised against the Reds, too, although they foolishly refused to join us, and were finally crushed. We also found huge warehouses full with weapons, ammunition and medicines, and the most incredible of all, we seized most of the Imperial gold reserves of Russia: 650 million rubles in gold coins and 100 million rubles in gold bars, platinum and other valuables. We could survive for many months thanks to all those resources.

For a few days the Bolsheviks were in shock, unable to react. Kappel tried to convince the Komuch that, if we took advantage of the situation and advanced to Moscow through Nizhny Novgorod, the war would be over before the end of the summer. And maybe he was right. But the Komuch was afraid of leaving Samara, Simbirsk and Kazan undefended, and the Czechs didn't really wish to fight a Russian war, so they didn't agree with Kappel. Maybe if he had been older, with a higher rank, they would have listened to him. But they didn't. We went on the defensive, and we let our enemies retake the initiative.

And that was the end of the Komuch. The Red Army regrouped and received reinforces, while all our attempts to mobilize a bigger army failed. The passivity of the Socialist-Revolutionaries led them to disaster. The Bolsheviks were a buch of fanatics, criminals and murderers, but their determination was simply enviable. They would stop at nothing in order to obtain power, and that gave them an advantage over all of us. Just one month after we occupied Kazan, a massive Soviet counterattack forced us to retreat down the Volga, towards Samara, with our enemies on our heels.






