It was incredible. We could rescue Kolchak and most of us crossed the Baikal and arrived safely in Chita. Unfortunately, not everyone did it. Thousands of people, including women and children, died along the way. We didn't have time, strength or resources to bury them, so we left them in the places where they fell. Actually, sometimes they didn't fall. They froze to death while they were standing, and they remained there, as ice statues on the snow, until the spring came and the waters of the lake swallowed them. 

A part of me can't help but pity the Socialist- Revolutionaries that stayed in Irkutsk. Their destiny was terrible. They didn't like us, but they soon learnt that the Bolsheviks were much worse than us.

As I've said, in the end we arrived in Chita. Kolchak and Kappel thought about continue the fighting in Trans- Baikal, but it was obvious that we didn't have an army anymore. We could convince them that the war was lost, and our only option was to cross the Chinese border and go into exile. The cossacks helped us to do it, and in April we finished the evacuation.

Once in China, all of us went different ways. Most émigrés went to Eastern Europe, but we actually ended up all around the world: France, the United Kingdom, America, Asia.  All the countries in the world had its share of exiled Russians. 

Problems didn't end when we left our country. Many prominent émigrés were murdered by Soviet agents. Many others went through very difficult times until they could adapt to their new lives. I was one of those. I knew that the war had ended, but somehow it still raged in my mind. I couldn't find peace. I couldn't rest, or sleep. I couldn't keep any job. I was desperate, and I wished that I had died in Russia.

It wasn't just because we had lost the civil war. It was more than that. I had lost everything that I held dear: my country, my loved ones, my sovereign. In one word, my identity. I had lost my purpose in life. 

So, when they told me that the Spanish Army was looking for foreign volunteers to fight in Morocco in their Legion, I didn't think it twice. I didn't want to be alive, so joining an elite unit whose nickname is "the grooms of death" seemed a perfect opportunity to leave this world doing what I was good at.

And I am still here. After all these years, death hasn't come for me yet. I can't say that I've been truly happy, but at least I've got used to my new life in the Legion and, although I don't know what the future holds for me, I am hopeful that things will get better.

The campaign is over. I hope you've liked it and thanks for playing.

Urica, 2018

