We tried again and again, but this time the Bolsheviks were too powerful. Many civilians and soldiers died or were captured by the Red Army, and the rest of us could barely escape to fight another day.

The Conference of Ufa had a bittersweet outcome, too. After many debates and discussions, on September 23rd the majority of the delegates agreed to establish a five-man Directory as the basis of a new government for all Russia. But the Mensheviks and some Socialist-Revolutionaries rejected the agreement, and left the conference.

Day after day, the situation became worse. The Directory didn't arrive in Omsk, the provisional capital, until October 9th. When they did, they found that they didn't have any real power. Until it officially dissolved on November 9th, the Siberian Government refused to comply with the orders of the Directory. The British attachés acted as the real rulers of the land, and the peasants and workers didn't show any real support.

On October 28th, with the Great War about to finish, the new state of Czechoslovakia was created. Naturally, the Czech Legion made clear that they didn't wish to be a part of our civil war, and that they would only follow the Directory as long as it served their own interests, that is, they'd be with us as long as they could return to their country as soon as possible. So our largest, and more experienced, military unit finally became a group of unpredictable mercenaries who, depending on the circumstances, could fight on our side or sell their own mothers for a train passage to Vladivostok. 

Lacking any kind of support, the days of the Directory were numbered. On November 17th a group of cossacks staged a coup d'etat. The next day the Directory was dissolved and the Minister of War, Admiral Alexandr Kolchak, became the Supreme Governor of All-Russia. Of course, I liked Kolchak's rule much better than the socialist governments that had tried to oppose the Bolsheviks until now, but I had learnt that, if we wanted to win the war, we were going to need allies. And that meant that we'd have to make concessions to the left-wing parties. 

Instead, Kolchak didn't want to make a deal with the socialists, and that's how most of the soldiers of the Komuch People's Army deserted, or even joined our enemies. As 1918 ended, where would we find the strength, the volunteers, and the supplies to overcome the terrible Red Army? Only time would tell.