Until you find somebody: the Komuch offensive (I)

June 8th, 1918

Without any doubt, 1917 was the worst year of my life. The Tsar was dethroned and, some time later, taken prisoner. My beloved Russia lost the Great War against Germany. And, on top of all that, the Bolsheviks took power in most of the country. My motherland seemed to be withering, and so did my soul. Wishing to die, and being certain that my end was near, in the first weeks of 1918 I returned to my hometown near Samara, where at least I'd spend my last days with my parents and sisters.

But it all changed when the Czech Legion, intending to leave Russia, revolted against the Bolsheviks, who had denied the Legion safe passage along the Trans-Siberian Railway  towards Vladivostok.

The Czechs soon took several towns along the railway, and during the first days of June they occupied Samara. Almost immediately, the anti-Bolshevik leaders in the town formed a provisional government, the Komuch, contolled by members of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, and called for the mobilization of a People's Army.

The mobilization didn't succeed. The Komuch had many supporters among the peasants and the factory workers, but they were tired after four years of war, and most of them, showing a short-sighted attitude that could lead them to death, refused to fight. For their part, the monarchists and the conservatives considered that the Komuch was scum, almost as bad as the Bolsheviks, so the majority of the right-wingers just stayed at home, denying the Komuch any help.

Instead, I decided to volunteer. I hated the idea of serving a socialist government and fighting under a red flag, but it was better than waiting at home for the Bolsheviks to shoot me. At least I'd have a last chance to die with my boots on.

The same evening, the officers who were at that time in Samara and had decided to join the Komuch Army discussed who could unite us and lead us. Nobody wanted to take that responsibility. People hesitated, and we were embarrased and silent. One captain even suggested drawing lots. Then, lieutenant colonel Vladimir Kappel, one of the youngest officers, stood up and said "if nobody wants to lead then, until you find somebody with higher rank, let me lead the military units against the Bolsheviks".

And that's how it began. A strange mixture of unreliable Czech veterans, a few hundreds of socialist volunteers and a handful of army officers joined in Samara and decided to fight the Bolsheviks. We'd start taking strategically important towns located along the railways, or on the shores of the Volga.

Victory conditions:
- Take all the VHs.










