Not dead yet: The Tobol offensive (I)

September 1st, 1919

All our efforts during the summer of 1919 had allowed us to retreat in order to the relative protection of the river Ishim. However, we knew that if we didn't launch a counteroffensive, the Red Army would destroy us completely before the next year. In fact, the Soviets acted as if they had already defeated us. Having learnt nothing from their setbacks at Ekaterinburg and Chelyabinsk, their quick advances in Siberia had convinced them that we were a bunch of corrupt incompetents, and they even had started to retire some units from the front, in order to send them against Denikin's Armed Forces of Southern Russia, or even further to the west, against the Polish Army.

The arrogance of the Bolsheviks gave us a chance to surprise them. As I've already written before, in July Kolchak had ordered the reorganization of the front and the unification of the Siberian Army and Western Army. General Diterikhs had been appointed as Commander in Chief of the Eastern Front. New armies and independent groups were created, mainly the 1st, the 2nd and the 3rd Armies. When the Tobol offensive began, I was serving in the latter.

Once the reorganization was complete, Diterikhs prepared our armies for the counteroffensive, which would begin in September. All our units would participate, but the 3rd Army, along with the Separate Siberian Cossack Corps, would inflict the main blow along the Omsk-Petropavlovsk-Kurgan railroad line, on our left flank. While our other units pinned the enemy down near the Ishim, the Cossacks and the 3rd Army would penetrate deeply into the rear of the 5th Red Army, allowing the encirclement and destruction of the Bolshevik divisions that were deployed further to the north.

It was a daring plan, and it needed to be perfectly executed if we were to have any chances of success. As the beginning of the offensive came close, I was overwhelmed by anxiety. I knew that this would be our last chance. If we let the Soviets live to fight another day, they would attack again soon, stronger that ever. And if that moment came, we'd have nothing left to defend ourselves.

Victory conditions:
- Take all the VHs.

Special note:
- You can buy equipment from the Cossack Hosts in this scenario.
