Darkness falling: Novonikolayevsk

December 7th, 1919

With a great effort, we reached the Tobol river. That's true. However, it didn't become our first step towards victory. It was just our swan song, and the Bolsheviks knew it. They simply waited on the western shore of the river until they were ready. And then, on October 14th, they advanced again. We could do nothing to stop them.

At the beginning of November they had already routed us. We had lost nearly half of our men, most of our best equipment, and desertions were common. Petropavlovsk fell with little resistance, as well as Omsk, the capital of our government. The United Kingdom and all the other friendly countries were discreetly retiring their support, and were "recommending" us to accept our defeat and leave Russia forever. 

Leaving! Ha! Like we could! The railroads were controlled by the Czech Legion, and they were using them for their own purposes. It was just a matter of time before they betrayed us and left us to die of cold. All the foreign fighters wanted to return to their countries, and they had no qualms about stealing our trains in order to secure their own evacuation. 

Actually, I couldn't blame them. Even the local Siberian politicians, most of them Socialist- Revolutionaries, were eager to get rid of us and make a deal with their new Bolshevik masters. The fools believed that Lenin and his minions would have mercy on them.

Our remaining units were withdrawn to the Obi, and our armies were reorganized. Our next mission would be de defense of Novonikolayevsk, along with a couple of Siberian regiments and the 5th Polish Division, which was still loyal. 

On November 20th the Soviets started their offensive. They quickly took Tatarsk and Semipalatinsk, and then marched against Barnaul, Kolyvan and Novonikolayevsk, where we were waiting for them.

And then, on December 7th, at the worst possible moment, there was an uprising of our 2nd Barabinsk Regiment in the city. Under the influence of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, those traitors wanted to expel us from Novonikolayevsk and hand it over to the communists. We couldn't let it happen, we had to resist and stop the Bolsheviks at the Obi.

Victory conditions:
- Take all the VHs.

Special notes:
- You can deploy only 18 ground units.
- This will be the last scenario with upgrading, auto-refit, auto-supply and train transports.
