Supporting the allies: Kobadin - September 17th, 1916

If anyone in Germany had suspected that the performance of the Austro-Hungarian Army would be so poor, it's likely that the WWI would have never started. In just a few months, after a series of crushing defeats against Russia and Serbia, the k.u.k Army nearlly collapsed, and was incapable of launching any new offensive operations in the Eastern Front without the help of its allies. The German counterattacks and, since Bulgaria joined the Central Powers in October of 1915, the victories in Serbia and Macedonia, alleviated the situation, but it was obvious that Germany would need all the help that she could receive.

Acknowledging the importance of a victory against Russia in the Eastern Front, we sent some of our best troops to that theatre of war, so far away from the boundaries of the Empire. In the summer of 1916 the XV Army Corps, with two divisions, was sent to Galicia. The XX Army Corps, with two divisions, and the 177th Infantry Regiment, went to Macedonia.  And finally, your VI Army Corps, with three divisions, went to Romania.

That country joined the side of the Entente on August 14, 1916. The Romanian Army isn't very big, and its equipment and training is outdated, but that additional help was all that the Russians need to alter the course of the war.

The Central Powers have reacted quickly. German and Austro-Hungarian forces are counterattacking in the Carpathians. Meanwhile, in the Danube, Bulgarian, German and Turkish units joined in the Heeresgruppe Mackensen. In the first days of September the Heeresgruppe liberated Southern Dobruca and afterwards it has followed its advance, parallel to the coast of the Karadeniz.

Before reaching the port of Köstence, the Heeresgruppe Mackensen has to break the last line of defence that Romania and Russia have built, which goes from Rasova to Tuzla. The High Command has decided that you, along with some German and Bulgarian troops, will lead the attack on the Western sector, from Rasova to Kobadin. 

This battle can be a difficult one. There are some six enemy divisions in the area, although some of them may be weakened after the previous battles, and they've had time to build trenches and machine gun nests. You'll have to employ your resources carefully, using your artillery to open holes on the enemy defence system before advancing.


Orders: Take all the VHs.

