Congratulations!

You have inflicted a heavy defeat on the rebels. You have earned you promotion to the rank of General.

The Queen Regent wants herself to impose you the general's sash. You will take the next steamer back to Spain.

Historical background:

Once Silang secured, Spanish forces marched into Pérez Dasmariñas, the main next village in the way to Aguinaldo’s capital, Imus. Following the only available route, a zigzag trail in the jungle, Spanish main advance was delayed by some Filipino trenches, some of them abandoned. Flank manoeuvres were also intercepted by trenches and skirmishes with the rebels.

Perez Dasmariñas was the bloodiest battle of the Cavite campaign. Katipunan revolutionaries, under the command of Aguinaldo himself, had built impressive trench works all around the village and fortified the village itself. After taking by assault the trenches, heavy and fierce combat took place inside the town, but finally Lachambre's forces squashed Filipino resistance. 

Both sides suffered heavy casualties, although as it was the case in all the campaign Filipino ones were much higher, including many Katipunan commanders like Aguinaldo's brother, Crispulo.

The result of the battle was a complete disaster for the Filipino revolutionaries and it signalled the advent of Spanish recapture of Cavite province. Aguinaldo had lost the best of its forces and the remaining ones had to retreat towards Imus. Although it took still some weeks and hard combats for the Spanish to reconquer the entire Cavite, the result of the offensive was clear.

Several weeks later Aguinaldo and his forces began the arduous retreat march towards a mountainous area in central Philippines. The military weakness and internal divisions in the Katipunan forced Aguinaldo to later sign the Pact of Biak-na-Bato on December 15, 1897. Under the Pact Aguinaldo agreed to end hostilities and dissolve his government in exchange for amnesty and an indemnity. On 23 December, Aguinaldo and other insurgent officials departed for Hong Kong to enter voluntary exile.