Congratulations General!

Not only is our honour saved but the Americans have suffered a tremendous defeat. This battle may change the course of the war.

Historical background

Soon after Dewey's victory at Manila Bay, Washington decided to send an expedition to reinforce him and capture Manila. Had Dewey supported Aguinaldo with naval gunfire he would probably have been able to seize the city earlier. However, by the end of May Dewey had received his first instructions not to have political alliances with the insurgents. Therefore, the capture of Manila had to wait three months.

The first American reinforcements to reach Dewey arrived on 30 June, after 36 days at sea. Additional convoys followed and by the end of July some 12,000 US Army troops under command of Major General Wesley Merritt had landed. After some skirmishes with the Spanish, beginning August Merritt considered he was ready for an assault on the city.

Meanwhile, following the Spanish naval defeat at Santiago de Cuba, on 7 July Spanish relief squadron under rear admiral Cámara had been ordered to return immediately to Spain to face possible U.S. Navy operations against Spain itself. Without reinforcements the ultimate fall of Manila was inevitable but Spanish Governor Augustin was ordered to continue resistance in order to get a better negotiation position in the peace talks already under way.

Although Merritt was for an immediate assault, Dewey wanted to negotiate a deal with General Fermin Jaudenes, the new Spanish Governor replacing Augustin due to his pessimism. On 10 August a deal was made. Jaudenes agreed to surrender after a fake battle to satisfy Spanish honour, provided the insurgents were kept out. 

The morning of 13 August American ships began firing Fort San Antonio Abad. Spanish made no reply. Soon after, US Army troops attacked. Although in general Americans advanced against virtually no resistance, in some cases they were engaged in heavy fights, probably due to the fact that only senior officers of both sides were aware that only a demonstration was to be made. By evening, Americans had occupied Manila and, as agreed, prevented Filipino troops to enter the city.

By that time, an armistice had been concluded. Had Spanish Governor Jaudenes been kept better informed, he could have longer preserved the city under Spanish control, thus rendering it a useful card in subsequent peace negotiations.