General, you must be ashamed of yourself!

Due to your incompetence, the insurgents have destroyed our forces in Cavite and part of the relief column. The rebellion has spread across the country and our situation in Manila is hopeless.

With immediate effect you are dismissed from the army.

Historical background:

In May 1898, with the outbreak of the Spanish-American War, Aguinaldo sought help from the U.S. Commodore Dewey agreed to transport Aguinaldo from Hong Kong to the Philippines and to provide him with arms. Aguinaldo arrived in Cavite on May 19, resumed command of Filipino rebel forces and scheduled a general uprising for May 31 in Cavite province, where Aguinaldo had most of his followers. 

However, on May 28, while still distributing firearms in Alapan (Imus), the Spanish sent a column of some 270 troops for the purpose of seizing the reported consignment of arms. Filipinos attacked the Spanish column that, after several hours of intense fighting, ran out of ammunition and surrendered. After his first military victory, Aguinaldo unfurled the Filipino flag for the first time in Cavite Nuevo.

General Leopoldo Garcia Peña, the Spanish military commander of Cavite Province, had 2,800 men loosely scattered in various small detachments across Cavite. Hard-pressed by around 12,000 enemy troops, he was not able to concentrate his forces. By May 31, Binakayan, Polvorin, Bacoor and Cavite Viejo had surrendered after they ran out of ammunition. In a few days, the entire province of Cavite was under the control of the revolutionaries (in reality, during the operation no US naval or land forces were involved). General Peña himself and his surviving troops were made prisoners.

A relief column of 500 infantrymen sent from Manila to reinforce General Peña was stopped at Zapote River after suffering heavy losses.

In a matter of weeks Aguinaldo's forces surrounded Manila and kept the Spanish soldiers bottled up inside the city until American troops could arrive. However, in late May, Dewey was ordered to distance himself from Aguinaldo. It was already evident that the US interests were not fully aligned with Filipino ones.

On June 12 Aguinaldo declared independence in Cavite Viejo.