Assignment
(1 April 1898)
v.1.0
The sunset of the Spanish Empire - The Spanish American War 1898

General,

I hope that you have had a good rest in Madrid after the last campaign and you are now full of energy for a new assignment.

As you know, following the sinking of the US ship "Maine" in Havana harbour our relations with the United States are fragile and precarious and war is about to break out.

You can choose to be assigned either to defend our "provincias de ultramar" in the Caribbean (Spanish West Indies) or the ones in the Pacific (Spanish East Indies).

Paqueo

January 2014

Historical background

U.S. interest in Cuba had begun long before 1898. American strategic and increasing economic interests in Cuba, mostly in sugar and tobacco, led to several attempts to acquire Cuba from Spain since the beginning of the XIX century (U.S. had already acquired Louisiana and Florida from Spain in 1803 and 1819 respectively). However, the more the Americans tried to bully Spain into selling Cuba, the more Spanish resisted the idea: Americans had miscalculated the strong links between Spain and Cuba and the Spanish sense of national honour and pride.

When the independents rebellion started in Cuba in 1868, the U.S. was concerned with the effect of such conflict on American interests there. When in 1895 another conflict erupted between Cuban separatists and Spain, the U.S. doubted Spain could prevail and felt that it was no longer reasonable to follow a policy of inaction. Despite U.S. proclamation of neutrality, sentiment to enter the conflict was growing in the United States, notably fuelled by the alleged harsh methods used by Spain against Cuban population. Both the U.S. government and public opinion felt peace in Cuba could only come about through American intervention.

On 15 February 1898 the armoured cruiser US Maine sank in Habana harbour after a sudden explosion, killing nearly three quarters of the crew. Sent to protect U.S. interests during the Cuban revolt against Spain, the cause and responsibility for the sinking remained unclear (most likely an undetected fire in one of the coal bunkers). Nevertheless, popular opinion in the U.S., fanned by the "Yellow Press" of William Randolph Hearst and Joseph Pulitzer, blamed Spain. While the sinking of the Maine was not a direct casus belli, the event, together with the perceived Spanish atrocities and loss of control in Cuba, created an atmosphere that virtually precluded a peaceful solution.

The U.S sent to Spain an ultimatum on April 20 demanding Spanish withdrawal from Cuba and granting of complete Cuban independence. Following the Spanish refusal, on April 21 the U.S. Navy began a blockade of Cuba. Spain declared war on April 23. Two days later, on April 25, the U.S. declared war. Unlawfully, the U.S. considered that a state of war between the U.S. and Spain had existed since April 21, the day the blockade of Cuba had begun.