General,

Spain may have lost the war and its empire but Spanish soldiers have won the admiration of the world through their valour, determination and heroism. You do not merit being part of the same army to which these brave soldiers belong to. You are dismissed from the service.

Historical background:

From July 1, 1898 to June 2, 1899, Filipino revolutionaries sieged the fifty-man garrison of the small town of Baler, who had fortified themselves in the stone church. Although the Spanish-American war ended in December 1898 with Spain's surrender and annexation of the Philippines to the United States, cut off from communications with their own government and military, the Spanish forces in Baler continued their defence against overwhelming superior Filipino forces for 11 months.

Spanish declined several invitations to surrender and only capitulated when they realized that the news that Spain had lost the war, which had been conveyed through different newspapers and emissaries, was not a ruse but reality. Recognizing their epic defence, Aguinaldo decreed that the survivors were to be considered "not as prisoners of war but as friends" and they were allowed to march to Manila to be repatriated to Spain, where they were lauded as heroes.

Of the 57 men who entered the church of Baler, 37 survived the 337-day siege; 14 men died (12 from diseases and only two from wounds) and four deserted. Two men were executed for helping in the desertion of another on June 1, 1899, the day before the surrender. 

Filipino surrounding troops initially amounted to 800 men but these increased during the siege, including some captured artillery. After some failed attempts to take the position, Filipinos opted to surround the church with trenches. Filipinos also suffered serious casualties.

It is noteworthy that on 12 April, upon the request of the Spanish High Command, the Americans intervened when Lt. Commander James C. Gilmore with fourteen crews from the gunboat USS Yorktown attempted to relieve the Spanish. However, they were captured by the Filipino forces and held prisoner for eight months before they were simply abandoned by their Filipino captors in the midst of the jungle.