Congratulations General! … or should I say Admiral?

Against all odds, you have destroyed or captured most of the American ships. Your determination and courage has leaded to a victory that no one thought possible.

Yet the surviving American ships still pose a serious threat and the Yankees will certainly send reinforcements soon. In view of the above, the need to scuttle most of our surviving ships due to the heavy damaged suffered during the battle, and the increasing pressure of Filipino insurgents, the High Command has ordered to abandon the naval station of Cavite.

Historical background

The battle of Manila Bay was the first major engagement of the Spanish-American War and it was decisive for the fate of the Philippines in 1898. In few hours, Dewey's Squadron completely destroyed the Spanish Pacific Squadron under Admiral Patricio Montojo.

Erroneous recurrent versions attribute the Spanish defeat to their old wooden vessels. However, only one ship of the Spanish naval force was made of wood, the other six being relatively recent iron or steel ships, even if unprotected and quite battered due to their intense use against Filipino rebels. Although Dewey's squadron heavily outweighed and outgunned the Spanish naval squadron in the Philippines, Dewey's victory is better explained by other factors such as American better preparation for action; serious Spanish mistakes as regards planning (dispersion of the scarce and mostly obsolete coastal artillery, delay in defensive works, decision to give battle to the Americans in Manila Bay); and the sense of defeatism with which the Spanish high officers were seize. British logistic support to Dewey's squadron, which made possible the attack from Hong Kong, cannot be underestimated either.

Although an attack to the Spanish forces in the Philippines had long been a part of the U.S. Navy's strategic plans in the event of a conflict with Spain, the objective of the offensive operation was not to conquer all or part of the Spanish colony, but divert Spanish ships and give the United States' a stronger bargaining position at the peace settlement. The magnitude of Dewey's victory changed these plans and prompted the United States to send the troops necessary to capture Manila from the Spanish.