Schlacht an der Yzer - October 18th 1914

After the fall of Antwerp that resulted in 35,000 Belgian fortress troops captured and the 1st British Naval Brigade interned in the Netherlands, our III Reserve Corps has pursued the retreating Belgian Army for more than a week. The Belgian Army has stopped its retreat and has taken position behind the river Yzer between Dixmude and Nieuport, holding on to the last small piece of unoccupied Belgium. By doing this, they are completing a continuous frontline that runs from the Swiss border in the South-East all the way to the North Sea in the North-West.

The new Chief of Staff Erich von Falkenhayn believes that we can still win the war by breaking through the Entente lines between Ypres and the Nort Sea. The 4th Ersatz division (also part of our III Reserve Corps) will attack North of your forces. It has 1 brigade at the front which will be accompanied by two more brigades in the next few days as soon as these will be relieved by the Marine Division Flandern that will then be guarding the coast between Oostende and Middelkerke. To the South is XXII Reserve Corps with the newly raised 43 Reserve and 44 Reserve Divisions. It has a single regiment facing the Belgian Army now - the rest of the two divisions will arrive piecemeal over the next few days. Fourty kilometers more South, around Ypres, 6th Army is trying to break through British lines North of Ypres, at Armentières, La Bassée and Messines to accomplish the same goals.

The army confronting your forces is a decimated tired Belgian Army supplemented by some French forces that have come to its rescue. Break through their lines and the channel ports of Calais and Boulogne-sur-Mer are ours. This will make it a lot harder for the Brits to supply their BEF, which could have decisive strategic consequences.

Brilliant victory is achieved by taking all eight Victory Hexes in the next 12 days (24 turns) or by exiting a Brigade size force (6 units) East of the Nieuport-Dixmude rail road. Not exiting a brigade but taking seven Victory Hexes will give you a victory, six Victory hexes a tactical victory.