...to Prague

Part 7/7 of the "Commanding the Corps" minicampaign.

*****

On 5th May 1945 Bohemian capitol Prague uprised, and before long, there are some thirty thousand men-at-arms fighting the occupants and about one hudred thousand men and women in auxiliary units who are building the barricades. Czech combatants are armed with anything from sticks and kitchen knives, through the pistols of Czech policemen and gendarms, many different kind of rifles that were hidden under a coal for the last six years, but also some MGs and panzerfausts captured from the Germans.

The very precious help for the insurgents are the soldiers of the 1st division of ROA, a unit of 18 000 Russian volunteers in German service, who joined the Uprising. Without them, Prague will be surely lost, but their tanks, tank hunters and artillery (and of course their experiences and numbers) are one of the main reasons why the insurgents may and will hold against the enemy armoured attacks. But the soldiers of ROA don't want to fall into Soviet hands, and it is possible that they'll withdraw westwards once the Soviets get closer to the city.

Intelligence and reconnaisance: Prague is a great intersection and any German that wishes to run away from the Soviets must move through the city no matter what. The Uprising hampered German situation in an extreme way, because they cannot cross the Vltava river anywhere else then via the bridges of Prague.

Feldmarschall Schorner has an immense number of units under his command and he's willing to drown the city in blood. A 2nd SS Panzer Division is coming from the north and these are experienced and well-equipped men, although their morale is a bit shaken. A 44th SS Panzer-Grenadier Division is closing form the south, they are moving through the Zbraslav and Radotin valleys of rivers Vltava and Berounka. In the east there are some smaller Kampfgruppen made of the SS PzJager school and the remnants of the 1st Flak Korps. Prague's garrison is very strong, of course. Finally there are some smaller enemy units that move towards the city.

Reinforces: None. All the men and women are already in the streets, either fighting the Germans or working on some of the two thousand of barricades. Maybe countryside may help... And of course our tankmen of the 1st Czechoslovak Army Corps.

Hint: The German morale is inconsistent. Third Reich has lost the war and the armistice is a matter of hours or days. But although the greenhorn and second grade units may crumble easily, and it is expected that they will lay down arms once the truce comes into effect, the experienced soldiers, and those that fear their fate in Soviet hands will fight to the last breath. And the men of SS, guilty of many war crimes, will never surrender.

There are two main routes towards the city that you may use, but the faster and more straight one is a bit jammed by the avantgarde of Soviet tank forces.

Warning: ROA auxiliaries will start to disengage in few turns. Starting from the westernmost ones, those units will leave the city in two waves.

Victory conditions: Capture all VHs.