Sokolovo

Part 2/2 of the "Birth of the Battalion" minicampaign.

*****

The 1st Czechoslovak Independent Field Battalion underwent its first action in March 1943 during the combats in Kharkov area. The battalion was ordered to hold the village of Sokolovo against the awaited German assault. This assault was delayed by a ferocious defense of the 78th Guards Rifle Regiment that held Taranivka. But once Taranivka fell, Germans quickly moved to the north. And on the afternoon of 8th March the first fourteen tanks started the armed reconnaisance of Sokolovo's outskirts...

Intelligence and reconnaisance: Germans have tens of armoured vehicles supported by two battalions of infantry. These are experienced men. Our forces consists of three infantry companies, nine light mortars and a dozen of HMGs. We have also some antitank guns, Soviet command gave us some artillery and engineers support. But our greatest strength is the village itself. Digged in the village, you will withstand the initial attack of German tanks. In the open... not so. Once you'll cripple the German forces, you may go into the offensive. Try to liberate the men surrounded in Taranivka... or at least unravel truth of their fate.

Reinforces: There are some reinforces on their way, mostly field and antitank artillery, but also a few tanks. They'll reach our postions after midnight. (One day is made of five turns.)

Hint: You'll be given orders through turn messages, so don't miss them. Once you'll tame the German assault, you should try to reach their SH so that you'll get some additional prestige.
Maybe you'll wish to visit this site: http://www.czechpatriots.com/csmu/combats.php
You may even check the maps of some battlefields to make your plans accordingly.

Victory conditions: You MUST defend the village. Any other result than a Briliant Victory is not possible - you don't want to end in German hands. Hold the initial VH for ten turns.

Warning: This scenario uses very limited deployment, use the "View the Strategic Map" feature first!