Invasion of Crete

Part 3/3 of the "In der Wueste und auf Kreta" minicampaign


"Herr General, I got important news. We've just got a message from nearby airfield. Seems like one of our units hold it, but they've been cut off for several days! I don't understand why the Luftwaffe cannot help them, namely now when we have total control over the airspace above the island. However, they radioed that they start to lack everything from water, ammunition to morale and that they have great losses. We are the closest German unit in the area, so... what are the orders? That airfield was our secondary objective, so maybe we should... Ja, Herr General, in einem augenblick!

So, here's the map. We must move through enemy territory. Scouts say that there are lots of British and Greek units all around, many of them disorganized, but others are still in good shape. And the local people joined the battle, too! I can't understand how on earth those paratroopers could hold the airfield for nearly a week... Pardon? Umm... I don't know. Is it import... Yes, yes, I'll find it out! Minute, please...

So, they are mixed bag, but most of them are from the second battalion of the Luftlande-Sturmregiment, some are from... General? General, are you alright? General Bistroff?!

Muller! Bring us some chair, sofort, don't you see that general is sick?"


Victory Condition: Capture the enemy VHs. Don't lose the paratroopers holding the SE airfield!

Hint: Defenders airforce is annihilated and his air defense is close to none. Your planes may roam free without any fear of interception.
On the other hand, the region is crawling with lots of enemy ground units including irregular troops with great knowledge of terrain.
High Command organised an air bridge. The first reinforces will reach us in few hours and a grand total of a mountaineer battalion will be transfered into the area. Until then, you must hold the initial airfield... Hurry up, before the paratroopers will be defeated.

Warning: This scenario uses limited deployment, use the "View the Strategic Map" feature first!