
ADELAIDE - 8 SEP 1943

South off Adelaide, Australia
CO Admiral Matome Ugaki

The Battle for Australia has begun. Six army divisions, the largest amphibious operation in history, has landed in Darwin, in northern Australia and won against strong resistance the battle for the bridgehead. Now the main body of this army advance towards Queensland in southeast direction. To enable a fast campaign the complete isolation of Australia is necessary. The north and east coast is secured by the Navy, only Perth and Adelaide remains as qualified for supplies or Allied troop landings. Therefore the occupation of these ports is planned by smaller landing operations. For the more difficult task, the Port of Adelaide, your troops are intended. It is likely that the Australians expect this move, and reinforce these point with more and better troops. Ultimately, a open harbor for urgently needed supplies is their only hope.

UPG: 2 x Ftr - A6M3 Reisen -> A6M5 Reisen
UPG: 2 x TB - B5N Kankoh -> B6N Tenzan

GOAL: Take all VHs!


BACKGROUND

In early 1942 elements of the Imperial Japanese Navy (IJN) proposed an invasion of Australia.

In Australia the government, the military and the people were deeply alarmed after the fall of Singapore in February 1942 about the possibility of a Japanese invasion of Australia. Japan had the military capability, and Australia lacked defenses. The Australians had no idea what the Japanese were planning; Tokyo in fact never planned an invasion. However the fear was real enough and led Australia to form a close reliance on the United States (rather than Britain) to protect it.

Meanwhile in Tokyo the secret Navy proposal was opposed by the Japanese Army and Prime Minister Hideki Tojo, who regarded it as being unfeasible given Australia's geography and the strength of the Allied defences. Instead, the Japanese military adopted a strategy of isolating Australia from the United States by advancing through the South Pacific. This offensive was abandoned following the Battle of the Coral Sea and Battle of Midway in May and June 1942, and all subsequent Japanese operations in the vicinity of Australia were undertaken to slow the advance of Allied forces.
