
SHANGHAI - 13 AUG 1937

International Settlement Shanghai, China
CO Admiral Denshichi Okawachi

After the outbreak of war with China in early July at the Marco Polo Bridge near Beijing, the Chinese have reinforce their presence around Shanghai with strong combat units and plan an attack on our positions within the city. Resist the attackers until reinforcements arrive! But note the neutrality of the International Settlement in Shanghai. In any case the fighting must kept out of this area.

GOAL: Hold 7/6/4 VH's for a BV/V/TV!


BACKGROUND

Since the outbreak of the war on July 7, 1937, most combat had occurred in and around North China in operations collectively known as the Battle of Beiping-Tientsin. Originally, neither China nor Japan wanted the skirmish to escalate into a full-scale war. Japan expected a quick ceasefire and further gains of Chinese territory, similar to what had happened earlier in the Mukden Incident (1931), January 28 Incident (1932), the Great Wall Incident (1933), and various other settlements brokered in the mid-1930s.

Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek saw the Marco Polo Bridge Incident as the boldest attempt yet by Japan to completely separate northern provinces from Chinese control and incorporate them into the Japanese puppet state of Manchukuo. In the wake of the Second United Front formed after the Xi'an Incident, this event broke the "Final Point" of Chiang's tolerance of Japanese aggression according to his policy of "internal pacification before external resistance." Chiang decided to initiate a full-scale war with Japan.

Around 9am on August 13, the Chinese Peace Preservation Corps exchanged small arms fire with Japanese troops in the Zhabei, Wusong, and Jiangwan districts of Shanghai. About 3pm the Japanese army crossed over the Bazi Bridge in Zhabei District and attacked various centers in the city. The Chinese 88th Division retaliated with mortar attacks. Sporadic shooting continued through the day until 4pm, when Japanese headquarters ordered ships of the Third Fleet, stationed in the Yangtze and the Huangpu River to open fire on Chinese positions in the city. Late that night, Chiang Kai-shek ordered Zhang Zhizhong to begin Chinese offensive operations the next day. The next morning the Chinese air force began bombing various Japanese targets and Chinese ground forces attacked at 3pm. On the same day, August 14, the Chinese government issued the Proclamation of Self-Defense and War of Resistance, explaining the government's resolve against Japanese aggression. The Battle of Shanghai had officially begun.
