
VLADIVOSTOK - 28 APR 1943

South off Golden Horn Bay, Sea of Japan
CO Admiral Soemu Toyoda

Like 1939, at the Russian-Manchurian border again a serious incident happened. A unit of our Kwantung Army was trapped and annihilated by the Russians. But this time it will have serious consequences for the Russians. We will reduce the home port of the Russian Pacific Fleet, Vladivostok, to ashes! For this operation three fleet carrier and some heavy units were assembled. Your task is to carry out a landing operation and to destroy as many fortifications as possible, while our air force and battleships take care of the Russian fleet. Act quickly, we need to have to withdrawn before the enemy bring in reinforcements!

GOAL: Kill 75 of 87 enemy MSU's and prevent the escape of any enemy naval unit via Exit Points!


BACKGROUND

By the beginning of World War II, the Soviet Pacific Fleet had two surface ship subdivisions, four submarine subdivisions, one torpedo boat subdivision, a few squadrons of ships and patrol boats, airborne units, coastal artillery and marines.

During the War the Pacific Fleet was in a permanent state of alert and ready for action, although the Soviets remained neutral with respect to the Empire of Japan, the only Axis power in the Pacific, even after Japan entered World War II. At the same time, the Soviets transferred 1 destroyer leader, 2 destroyers, and 5 submarines from the Pacific Fleet to the Northern Fleet. More than 140,000 sailors from the Pacific Fleet were incorporated in the rifle brigades and other units on the Soviet front against Germans in Europe. By August 1945, the Pacific Fleet consisted of two cruisers, one destroyer leader, ten destroyers, two torpedo boats, 19 patrol boats, 78 submarines, ten minelayers, 52 minesweepers, 49 "MO" anti-submarine boats (MO stands for "little hunter"), 204 motor torpedo boats and 1459 war planes.

During the Soviet-Japanese War (1945), the Pacific Fleet participated in the removal of the Empire of Japan from Northern Korea (a part of the Manchurian Operation of 1945), in the South Sakhalin Operation of 1945, and the Kuril Islands Landing Operation the same year.
