
DUTCH HARBOR - 11 NOV 1943

North off Dutch Harbor, Aleutian Islands
CO Admiral Soemu Toyoda

After Australia and New Zealand is lost as staging area, the enemy prepare an attack from the North Pacific, Alaska! However, at the moment this area does not own the necessary infrastructure for such an operation. So the enemy will need some time to build these structures. But we will not give this time to them, we will thwart these plans and attack Dutch Harbor at the Aleutian Islands. A submarine and seaplane base was built there and the massive expansion, not only of this stronghold, is a clear sign for the intentions of our enemy to continue the war.  However, at time no combat troops are stationed there, which will make your task easier.

GOAL: Take all VHs!


BACKGROUND

The Aleutian Islands Campaign was a struggle over the Aleutian Islands, part of the Alaska Territory, in the Pacific campaign of World War II starting on 3 June 1942. A small Japanese force occupied the islands of Attu and Kiska, but the remoteness of the islands and the difficulties of weather and terrain meant that it took nearly a year for a far larger U.S./Canadian force to eject them. The islands' strategic value was their ability to control Pacific Great Circle routes. This control of the Pacific transportation routes is why U.S. General Billy Mitchell stated to the U.S. Congress in 1935, "I believe that in the future, whoever holds Alaska will hold the world. I think it is the most important strategic place in the world." The Japanese reasoned that control of the Aleutians would prevent a possible U.S. attack across the Northern Pacific. Similarly, the U.S. feared that the islands would be used as bases from which to launch aerial assaults against the West Coast.

The battle is known as the "Forgotten Battle", due to being overshadowed by the simultaneous Guadalcanal Campaign. In the past, many western military historians believed it was a diversionary or feint attack during the Battle of Midway meant to draw out the U.S. Pacific Fleet from Midway Atoll, and was in fact launched simultaneously under the same overall commander, Isoroku Yamamoto. However, historians Jonathan Parshall and Anthony Tully have made an argument against this interpretation, stating that the Japanese invaded the Aleutians to protect the northern flank of their empire and did not intend it as a diversion.
