
CEYLON - 12 SEP 1942

East off Ceylon, Bay of Bengal
CO Admiral Chuichi Nagumo

A large operation, hopefully bring us closer to establish control over the Indian Ocean, has begun. The loss of Ceylon will be a serious blow to the British and a strong signal to the Indian independence movement. By launching of well-directed misinformation’s, we was able to lure a part of the British Pacific Fleet into the Bay of Bengal. These forces, including two aircraft carrier, now try to escape into the Indian Ocean. You have order to destroy this forces. For this task, a interception group will be provided on the west coast of Ceylon. The landing operation take place at two points, north and south of Trincomalee on the east coast. A part of the Guards Division and two additional aircraft carrier will support you.

BUY: 1 x Inf - 42 SNLF Infantry w. Trucks
BUY: 1 x Tk - Type 97 Shinhoto Chi-Ha
UPG: 2 x Ftr - A6M2 Reisen -> A6M3 Reisen
UPG: 3 x Inf - 42 SNLF Infantry -> 42 SNLF Infantry w. Trucks

GOAL: Take all VHs and prevent the escape of more than 1 enemy naval unit via Exit Point!


BACKGROUND

Following the destruction of the American-British-Dutch-Australian Command forces in the battles around Java in February and March, the Japanese sortied into the Indian Ocean to destroy British seapower there and support the invasion of Burma. The Japanese force had six carriers: Akagi, Ryujo, Hiryu, Soryu, Shokaku and Zuikaku. This powerful force left Staring Bay, Celebes on 26 March 1942.

The first raids were against shipping in the Bay of Bengal by the carrier Ryujo and six cruisers under the command of Admiral Jisaburo Ozawa. They sank 23 ships. Five more were sunk by submarines off India's west coast.

On 5 April 1942, the Japanese struck with a force of 125 aircraft the naval base at Colombo, Ceylon, sinking the armed merchant cruiser HMS Hector and the old destroyer HMS Tenedos in the harbour. Then Japanese search planes discovered the heavy cruisers HMS Cornwall and Dorsetshire southwest of Ceylon and a second attack wave sank them.

On 9 April, the Japanese attacked the harbor at Trincomalee, sank the carrier HMS Hermes, the destroyer HMAS Vampire and the corvette HMS Hollyhock.

The sortie demonstrated Japanese superiority in carrier operations, and exposed the unprofessional manner in which the RAF was run in the East, but it did not destroy British naval power in the Indian Ocean. The British was able to save his fast carriers HMS Indomitable and Formidable to fight another day.

An invasion was feared by the British, who interpreted the Japanese failure to do so as due to heavy losses over Ceylon - and hence led to claims of a British victory. However, in reality the Japanese did not have the men, shipping or land based air power to spare for an invasion and occupation and were not even in a position to make a temporary occupation as a raid. The island did not face a real threat of invasion at any point during the war.

The island of Ceylon was strategically important, since it commanded the Indian Ocean. Thus it controlled access to India, the vital Allied shipping routes to the Middle East and the oilfields of the Persian Gulf. Ceylon held most of the British Empire's resources of rubber. An important harbor and naval base, Trincomalee, was located on the island’s eastern coast. Japanese propaganda had an effect on many of the Sinhalese population, who now awaited their arrival.

Three British army divisions came to strengthen Ceylon’s defences against a possible internal anti-British uprising; also measures to improve morale ensued, such as ensuring Sinhalese food rations were increased. Several minor mutinies against the British by native soldiers were quickly put down. Admiral Sir G. Layton remained in Ceylon for most of the war. Later, Ceylon would become an important base for the planned retaking of Malaya and Singapore.
