
AUCKLAND - 1 JUN 1943

West off Auckland , New Zealand
CO Admiral Shigeyoshi Inoue

As Admiral Yamamoto once prophesied - the U.S. Government are only willing to talk about peace, if our troops are facing Washington - Ha, Ha, anyway, our diplomatic efforts to end the war were rebuffed. As a result of this setback, the occupation of New Zealand and Australia was decided, to eliminate these countries as staging area for an assumed counter-offensive in Southeast Asia.

In a first phase of this large-scale operation your troops will attack Auckland in the north of New Zealand, while a second group takes over the southern part. The landing takes place on the western side of the island. You have to expect a garrison in strength of 2 divisions. After your landing a diversionary attack on the port from the eastern side is planned.

GOAL: Take all VHs!


BACKGROUND

Although an invasion of New Zealand was never really considered by the Japanese, New Zealand were preparing for this possibility. As part of this preparations the defensive forces stationed in New Zealand were expanded in late 1941. The role of the Territorial Force was to counter any Japanese landings in New Zealand, and it was organised into both mobile and fortress units. The Home Guard would support the Territorial units in the event of an invasion. On 1 November, three new brigade headquarters were raised (taking the total in the New Zealand Army to seven), and three divisional headquarters were established to coordinate the units located in the Northern, Central and Southern Military Districts. The division in the Northern Military District was designated the Northern Division, and comprised the 1st and 12th Brigade Groups. Northern Division later became 1st Division. 4th Division was established in the Central Military District (with 2nd and 7th brigades), and 5th in the south (with 3rd, 10th and 11th brigades).

The forces stationed in New Zealand were considerably reduced as the threat of invasion passed. During early 1943, each of the three home defence divisions were cut from 22,358 to 11,530 men. The non-divisional units suffered even greater reductions. The New Zealand government ordered a general stand-down of the defensive forces in the country on 28 June, which led to further reductions in the strength of units and a lower state of readiness. By the end of the year, almost all of the Territorial Force personnel had been demobilised (though they retained their uniforms and equipment), and only 44 soldiers were posted to the three divisional and seven brigade headquarters. The war situation continued to improve, and the 4th Division, along with the other two divisions and almost all the remaining Territorial Force units, was disbanded on 1 April 1944.
