
NEW HEBRIDES - 27 NOV 1942

North off New Hebrides Islands, South Pacific
CO Admiral Seiichi Ito

After the annoying delay through the Allied offensive in the Solomon Islands, Operation FS, the occupation of the New Hebrides, New Caledonia, Fiji and Samoa has to be executed immediately. In a first phase your troops will carry out the conquest of the New Hebrides, especially Espiritu Santo. The Americans were not lazy last time and have built numerous airfields and maritime facilities on the islands and a infantry division service as garrison. Seaplane and torpedoboat bases were built and heavy B-17 bombers stationed on the airfields threaten our bases on the Solomon Islands. The Allied fleet could be largely expelled from the surrounding water, however expect some disruptive actions during your landing. Extensive reconnaissance should you protect against unpleasant surprises. One of our heaviest battleships, the Yamato will give fire support in this operation.

BUY: 1 x ATY - Type 3rd Year 3-inch w. Type 98 Ko-Hi
UPG: 1 x CL - Kuma CL -> Mogami CA
UPG: 1 x TB - C5M -> D4Y1-C

GOAL: Take all VHs!


BACKGROUND

New Hebrides was the colonial name for an island group in the South Pacific that now forms the nation of Vanuatu. Espiritu Santo is the northernmost and largest of the New Hebrides islands. When the Japanese moved into the Solomons and began construction of airfields on Guadalcanal, an Allied air base in an advance area became vital. The choice of Espiritu Santo, 630 miles southeast of Guadalcanal, in the New Hebrides, as a site for a major Army and Navy operating base, brought the U.S. bombers 400 miles closer to the Japanese positions and provided a staging area for the forthcoming Allied invasion of the Solomons. The base provided aircraft facilities capable of supporting heavy bombers, fighters, and two carrier groups; an accumulation of ammunition, provisions, stores, and equipment for offensive operations; repair and salvage facilities for all types of vessels. It became a vital link between Henderson Field on Guadalcanal and the airfields at Noumea and Efate. 

Operation FS was the name of the Imperial Japanese plan to invade and occupy Fiji, Samoa, New Hebrides and New Caledonia in the south Pacific during the Pacific conflict of World War II. The operation was set to be executed in July or August 1942 following the MO, RY, and MI (Battle of Midway) operations.

FS was to be a joint effort between the Imperial Japanese Navy and the Imperial Japanese Army. The primary goal of the FS operation was to, following the completion of MO, RY, and MI, cut the supply and communication lines between Australia and the United States, with the goal of reducing or eliminating Australia as a base to threaten Japan's perimeter defenses in the South Pacific.

The FS operation was postponed following the Japanese setback at the Battle of the Coral Sea, then cancelled after the Japanese defeat at the Battle of Midway, following the losses of four Japanese fleet carriers. The land forces originally dedicated for the FS operation, namely the 17th Army, were instead reassigned to a subsequently unsuccessful reattempt to take Port Moresby, part of the original goal for the MO operation, and to defend the Solomon Islands from Allied offensives.
