
NEW CALEDONIA - 15 DEC 1942

Southwest off New Caledonia, South Pacific
CO Admiral Seiichi Ito

Phase II of Operation FS starts. Noumea, the capital of New Caledonia on the main island Grande Terre is the goal of your attack. The Americans have ready an infantry division and some old battleships for defense. Also many heavy bombers stationed on the surrounding airfields. They expect an attack on the eastern side of the island and have positioned their ships there. But we will dare a direct attack on Noumea, on the west side of the island and sink their fleet with our superior naval artillery and air force.

GOAL: Take all VHs or destroy all enemy units!


BACKGROUND

New Caledonia was a French colony. It had committed its loyalties to the Free French organization in September 1940, shortly after France had fallen to the German forces, and for some time prior to the entry of the United States into the war, an Australian garrison had been stationed there. The colony marked the end of the island-protected portion of the Australian shipping lane; from New Caledonia westward to Australia there was but the open Coral Sea.

The harbor at Noumea was extensive and well protected, but during the early months of the war it had been considered a bit too far forward for major naval-base development. Until the early summer of 1942, Auckland had been preferred as the site of the principal base facilities for U.S. naval forces in the South Pacific, and a considerable amount of construction had been undertaken there in cooperation with the New Zealand government.

But during the months that followed, emphasis shifted from Auckland to Noumea as the location of U.S. Navy's principal fleet base in the South Pacific. On November 8, 1942, U.S. South Pacific headquarters was established there. Additional construction battalions were assigned to the area during the latter months of the year, and development proceeded rapidly until Noumea became the most important of the South Pacific installations.
