
SYDNEY - 10 OCT 1943

Northwest of Sydney, Australia
CO Admiral Matome Ugaki

Our attack on Sydney is stalled, Commander! Although we have smashed the Australian Air Force and the remnants of the British-Australian Navy withdraw into the harbors, the enemy has successfully establish a strong defensive position north-west of Sydney and stooped our advance.
A direct attack on these positions would be too costly, therefore we will try something different - your amphibious corps will perform a flank attack from northeastern direction. The terrain to overcome is difficult but no problem for your vehicles and the enemy does not expect an attack in this direction. Advance fast to Brisbane at the coast - if this city is in our hands move under the protection of our naval guns along the coast to the south towards Sydney. With your men in the back, we hope the Australians will be forced to leave their entrenched positions!

GOAL: Take all VHs!


BACKGROUND

Japan's success in the early months of the Pacific War led elements of the Imperial Japanese Navy to propose invading Australia. In December 1941 the Navy proposed including an invasion of Northern Australia as one of Japan's 'stage two' war objectives after South-East Asia was conquered. This proposal was most strongly pushed by Captain Sadatoshi Tomioka, the head of the Navy General Staff's Planning section, on the grounds that the United States was likely to use Australia as a base to launch a counter-offensive in the South-West Pacific. The Navy headquarters argued that this invasion could be carried out by a small landing force as this area of Australia was lightly defended and isolated from Australia's main population centres. There was not universal support for this proposal within the Navy, however, and Isoroku Yamamoto, the commander of the Combined Fleet, consistently opposed it.

The Japanese Army opposed the Navy's proposal as being impractical. The Army's focus was on defending the perimeter of Japan's conquests, and it believed that invading Australia would over-extend these defence lines. Moreover, the Army was not willing to release the large number of troops it calculated were needed for such an operation from the Kwantung Army in Manchuria as it both feared that the Soviet Union would enter the Pacific War and wanted to preserve an option for Japan to invade Siberia.

Prime Minister Hideki Tojo also consistently opposed invading Australia. Instead, Tojo favoured a policy of forcing Australia to submit by cutting its lines of communication with the US. In his last interview before being executed for war crimes Tojo stated that:

    We never had enough troops to [invade Australia]. We had already far out-stretched our lines of communication. We did not have the armed strength or the supply facilities to mount such a terrific extension of our already over-strained and too thinly spread forces. We expected to occupy all New Guinea, to maintain Rabaul as a holding base, and to raid Northern Australia by air. But actual physical invasion - no, at no time.
