
CHASE THE RUSSIAN BEAR! - 28 OCT 1929

Sino-Soviet War, 1929

Shuangyashan, Kirin Province - Manchuria

After we took over control of the Chinese Eastern Railway in Manchuria, the treacherous Soviets have invaded our country on the northern border and occupying several villages in our Kirin Province. We cannot tolerate this act of war! Teach the Russians a lesson and drive away the invaders!

ORDERS
Take all VHs.

CORE (18 units)
3x Tank (+1)
5x Infantry
2x AT
2x Recon
1x Flak
3x Arty
2x TB

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

SINO-SOVIET CONFLICT (1929)

The Sino-Soviet conflict of 1929 was an armed conflict between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Chinese warlord Zhang Xueliang of the Republic of China over the Chinese Eastern Railway (also known as CER).

The conflict was the first major combat test of the reformed Soviet Red Army - one organized along the latest professional lines - and ended with the mobilization and deployment of 156,000 troops to the Manchurian border. Combining the active-duty strength of the Red Army and border guards with the call-up of the Far East reserves, approximately one-in-five Soviet soldiers was sent to the frontier, the largest Red Army combat force fielded between the Russian Civil War (1917-1922) and the Soviet Union's entry into the Second World War.

In 1929, the Chinese Northeastern Army took over the Chinese Eastern Railway to regain solo control of the railway. The Soviet Union quickly responded with a military intervention, eventually forcing the Chinese to return the railway to the previous format of joint administration.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sino-Soviet_conflict_(1929)
Sino-Soviet conflict (1929) 09. October 2020.

STORY

Despite their heavy defeat at Lahahasu the Manchurian Army did not accept the Soviet peace proposal and prepared a counter-attack. It was expected that they would take advantage of the freezing of the Amur River and the forced withdrawal of the Soviet fleets to their winter base at Khararovisk. The Manchurians had decided to fortify the city of Fushin, which was reinforced by units from the surrounding garrisons. On the eve of the battle for the city the Manchurians could field 7th and 9th Kirin Infantry Brigades and part of the 43rd Cavalry Regiment. The garrison was strengthened by the arming of the city’s militia and its police force while two more cavalry regiments and a large number of smaller units arrived from the nearby city of Sansin. In preparation for the battle the Manchurians had destroyed all the bridges on the road between Lahahasu and Fushin. They had also prepared 13 km of trenches 14 km from the city, were armed with field artillery. In the city barricades were built for what the Chinese claimed would be a determined defence. The Manchurians were left with the cruiser Kiang Chin and three steamers, the Kiang Hai , Kiang Yung and the Kiang U n. They also had the armed transport Li Chuan which had also escaped up the Sungari River after the defeat at Lahasusu. The Soviet force assigned to the attack on Fushin was made up of the Amur River Flotilla with co-operation from the 2nd Light Infantry Division and the 5th Amur and 4th Volochaevka Regiments. The Soviet vessels that had been allotted to the Fushin Operation were divided into two groups with the 1st Group given the task of sailing into the town’s harbour. This force included the monitors Krasnyi Vostokand the Sun Yat-sen , gunboats, two minesweepers, the minelayer Silyni and the armoured boat Bars . This 1st Group was to be under the command of the Admiral of the Fleet. The 2nd Group were to land troops near to Fushin for the land attack on the city and the ships involved were the monitor Sverdlov , the gunboat Bednota and several steamers of the transport detachment. Aboard these ships of the 2nd Group were the 5th Amur Regiment, two Battalions of the 4th Volochaevka Regiment and a squadron of Red cavalry. The land forces were under the command of the general who led the 2nd Light Infantry Division. The monitor Lenin was to stay behind the two Groups securing Lahahsusu and the Soviet Navy’s escape route if necessary. On the eve of the battle the weather was beginning to grow colder, freezing sections of the Sungari River. The water level began to fall endangering the Soviet ships. Ice covered the decks of the ships and gathered on their rigging and on the clothing of their crews. The two groups began their move up river on the night of the 30th of October By 15.00 both Groups were approaching the Chinese barrage put across the river with the minelayers and gunboats in the vanguard. They were fired on by the Chinese cruiser Kiang Chin but her shells fell short and she had to withdraw. She suffered damage and was not to see action again. The barrage was found to include seven sunken barges with girders fastened to their decks making a formidable barrier. There were also two steamers, still afloat but damaged, anchored across the river. As it was getting dark the Soviet fleet chose to wait at anchor and renew their attack on the 31st. In the morning the 2nd Group began disembarking its troops while the 1st Group engaged any Chinese ships that got too close. The 5th Light Infantry Regiment and the Squadron of Cavalry were landed with the task of outflanking the city. By 18.00 the Soviet Army units had taken the eastern suburbs of Fushin while other units took the western part of the city. As in Lahahasusu the Manchurians retreated into the city centre and the Soviet troops had to fight street by street. It had been taken by 02.00 the next morning. The Battle for Fushin was far more difficult than Lahahasusu as the winter temperatures fell to 11 degrees below, with winds of force 8. Both sides suffered terribly from the cold although all troops involved were acclimatised. Losses in the battle were reported by the Soviets at 300 Manchurian dead and several thousand wounded. According to the Soviet reports the Russians lost a ridiculously low 3 killed and 11 wounded. More significant for the Manchurians, they had lost the use of the Kiang Chin and all the remaining river vessels. Although the land war was not yet over the Manchurians could not stop the Soviet fleet from using the Sungari and Amur Rivers in their army’s support.

p. 114-116. Jowett, Philip S. (2017). The Bitter Peace. Conflict in China 1928-37. Stroud: Amberley Publishing.