
BATTLE FOR CHENGCHOW - 7 SEP 1930

The Central Plains War, 1929-30

Fukow, Honan Province - Northern China

Our offensive against the heavily defended hub of Chengchow will crush the alliance of this rebellious warlords and hopefully end the war. Use our superior firepower and air force to break the enemy!

ORDERS
Take all VHs.

CORE (22 units)
4x Tank (+1)
6x Infantry (+1)
2x AT
2x Recon
2x Flak
3x Arty
3x TB

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

STORY

A huge Nationalist offensive was in preparation in the first days of September with an estimated 300,000 men in 27 divisions to be used to finally crush the rebels. They were to take part in a two-pronged offensive against the city of Chengchow with the first advance going westwards along the Lunghai Railway and the second northwards up the Hankow-Chengchow Railway. This large army was under the joint command of Generals Chou Ting-kwai, Chang Kwang-ng’ai and Koo Tso-tong. In addition, the 1st Training Division under General Fang Yi-pei was to join the army for the offensive. The heaviest fighting took place between the 7th and 16th of September with the well trained Kuominchun troops putting up stiff resistance. It was estimated that Feng still had 200,000 ‘disciplined and well-equipped troops in strongly entrenched positions’ on the Lunghai Front. On the 17th Feng’s divisions launched a counter-offensive which gained some ground for the Kuominchun and inflicted heavy losses on the Nationalist Army. The main aim of this successful Kuominchun offensive however was to cover Feng’s retreat to his base in Shensi province. On the 25th Feng was forced to surrender Lanfeng, one of the strongest Kuominchun positions on the Lunghai Railway. The Nationalist offensive launched on the Lunghai-Hankow-Chengchow Railway Front was Lo Ho River and were continuing their advance on the vital city of Chengchow. Two divisions of the Nationalist Army under the command of General’s Chiang Kwang-ngai and Cho Ting-kai from Canton had attacked the city of Haishihkuan. The Shansi army was also under pressure from North-Eastern Army divisions advancing southwards down the Peking-Chengchow Railway. Instead of retreating in front of the larger Manchurian force, the Shansi Army began to prepare defences in and around the cities of Nankow and Chengting. Their intention was to defend these cities and the vital rail junction at the city of Shichiachuan. Shichiachuan was the key to any National Army advance on the Shansi capital at Taiyuan and had to be well defended.

The fighting around Chengchow and along the Peking-Hankow Railway was particularly ferocious at the end of September. Two Nationalist divisions under Generals Liu Mao-an and Ha Meng-yang outflanked the Kuominchun at Yunyang. These divisions then joined the assault on Chengchow, despite continued resistance by General Sun Lien-chung’s troops. Kuominchun forces were digging defensive positions around the city but were under bombardment by Nationalist heavy artillery. Feng Yu-hsiang had ordered two divisions to be sent to reinforce the defenders of Chengchow. On the 30th of September Chiang Kai-shek inspected large numbers of Nationalist troops at Fukow, which were to be used to attack Chengchow. Meanwhile, the battle for Chengchow had reached its climax with 80,000 Nationalist Army troops crossing the river. They were within a few miles of the city when they were met by an overwhelming Kuominchun force which had been positioned skilfully by Feng. He had been able to build new entrenchments in just the right place having had inside information on Chiang’s plans. A Nationalist plane had been forced to land behind Kuominchun lines and it was carrying dispatches that included Chiang’s orders. The Kuominchun had an advantage at Chengchow in that its forces were operating on inner lines. This meant reinforcements could be quickly rushed to any threatened section of the defences. Nationalist lines had to stretch in a long semi-circle around Chengchow, which meant they needed more troops to man them. As Chiang moved more and more troops towards Chengchow this advantage waned and Feng was ready to strike his final blow. On the 6th of October a large Kuominchun army was defeated close to Chengchow. Chiang received a message from their commander General Li Chin-lin to say they wished to surrender. Their retreat along the Peking-Hankow Railway had been cut off after the line had been destroyed by Nationalist engineers.

The Nationalist Army continued their advance towards Chengchow and on the 8th of October the Army’s 11th Division entered the outskirts of the city at 9.00 am. Twelve hours later the whole of the city was in Nationalist hands, along with Feng’s HQ and large amounts of heavy weaponry and equipment. During the assault the Nationalists lost one of their best-loved commanders, General Chang K’uang-lo. A 30,000-strong Kuominchun force now retreated to a new position 40 miles north of the city.

p. 84-89. Jowett, Philip S. (2017). The Bitter Peace. Conflict in China 1928-37. Stroud: Amberley Publishing.
