
XIANG RIVER - 27 NOV 1934

Chinese Civil War (first phase, 1927-37)

Hengyang, Hunan Province - Southern China

With the help of corrupt warlords, the communist Red Army was able to escape our encirclement. But thanks to the speed of your troops there is no escape. Catch the communists before they reach the Xiang River and destroy as many enemy troops as possible!

ORDERS
a. Destroy 54 enemy units.
b. Prevent that 18 enemy ground units reach the Exit Points.

CORE (28 units)
4x Tank
6x Infantry
3x AT
3x Recon (+1)
2x Flak
4x Arty
3x Ftr (+1)
3x TB

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

STORY

On the night of 10 October 1934, the Red Army leadership gave marching orders to the First Front Red Army. The units moved southwest in two columns, with First, Third, Fifth, Eight, and Ninth Red Army Corps. The total force was approximately 87,000. For many soldiers, they did not know it would be the last time they would see the Jiangxi Soviet. Instead, many believed they were on another maneuver to outflank the KMT and attack its rear. A force of 16,000, including many injured soldiers such as its leader, Chen Yi, was left behind in Ruijin to defend against and delay the KMT forces, giving the First Front Red Army enough time to escape unnoticed. With this movement, the Long March began.

The initial few days of the Long March were quite peaceful. The Red Army avoided any major engagement with NRA forces and navigated through a gap in the encirclement quite easily. Earlier, Zhou Enlai had negotiated a truce with the Guangdong and Guangxi warlords participating in the Extermination campaign, helping the Red Army gain safe passage through the area. Meanwhile, the remaining Red Army forces in Ruijin fought tenaciously against the NRA, which helped conceal the reality that the main body had already absconded. Up until November 8, Nationalist newspapers reported the Red Army had been all but destroyed. The First Front Red Army moved at night, traveling along small trails to avoid aerial detection and attack. The formation of forces was the First and Ninth Red Army Corps on the left flank, the Third and Eighth Red Army Corps on the right flank, the leadership and logistical units in the center, and the Fifth Red Army Corps providing rear guard. The Red Army hired porters to help carry its heavy equipment, to include printing presses, X-ray machines, and its money. Other porters helped transport litters that carried the injured and key leaders. Some of the Red Army leaders, to include Zhou Enlai, were sick or injured during this time, though others, like Mao, rode in litters to rest during the day after long night-planning sessions.

By mid-November 1934, the NRA discovered the Red Army had escaped the encirclement to the west and began its pursuit. From the Red Army’s movement, Chiang and the NRA leadership deduced that southern Hunan was the Red Army’s most likely destination and deployed troops in pursuit. The Red Army continued to rapidly move west, hoping to cross the Xiang River before the NRA forces arrived. On November 27, 1934, the Red Army arrived at Daoxian and attacked the NRA blockhouses protecting Xiang River crossings. The Red Army was able to quickly reduce the blockhouses, and began flowing forces across the river. However, its central column, bogged down by heavy equipment and injured soldiers, did not keep pace with the rest of the Red Army, and lagged behind. On November 28, the NRA attacked the rear elements of the Red Army before it made it to the Xiang River. For five days, the Red Army fought a ferocious rear-guard action as it attempted to disengage its forces from the NRA and cross the river. By December 2, 1934, all the Red Army forces had made it across the Xiang River, though at a cost. The Red Army lost more than two divisions from the Third and Fifth Red Army Corps. After the Xiang River crossing, just over 30,000 soldiers remained in the force. Additionally, much of the Army’s heavy equipment and books were abandoned along the route in order to lighten its load.

p. 150-151 Hsu, Wilbur W. (1999). Survival Through Adaptation: The Chinese Red Army and the Extermination Campaigns, 1927-1936. West Point, N.Y.: Combat Studies Institute Press.
