
LAUNCH INTO HUNAN - 20 JUL 1926

The Northern Expedition, 1926-28

Hengyang, Hunan Province - Southern China

Our fathers Sun Yat-sen's vision of a united China should come true! The long-planned campaign against the warlords in the north has begun.
As a first step, we will attack the warlord Wu Peifu from the Zhili clique. Conquer the capital city of Changsha in Hunan Province!

ORDERS
Take all VHs.

NOTES
Capture an airfield as soon as possible before your planes run out of fuel. Buying one additional unit or two during the scenario is a good idea.

CORE (8 units)
1x Tank
3x Infantry
1x AT
1x Recon
1x Arty
1x TB (+1)

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

THE NORTHERN EXPEDITION

The Northern Expedition was a military campaign launched by the National Revolutionary Army (NRA) of the Kuomintang (KMT), also known as the "Chinese Nationalist Party", against the Beiyang government and other regional warlords in 1926. The purpose of the campaign was to reunify China, which had become fragmented in the aftermath of the Revolution of 1911. The expedition was led by Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, and was divided into two phases. The first phase ended in a 1927 political split between two factions of the KMT: the right-leaning Nanjing faction, led by Chiang, and the left-leaning faction in Wuhan, led by Wang Jingwei. The split was partially motivated by Chiang's purging of communists within the KMT, which marked the end of the First United Front. In an effort to mend this schism, Chiang Kai-shek stepped down as the commander of the NRA in August 1927, and went into exile in Japan.

The second phase of the Expedition began in January 1928, when Chiang resumed command. By April 1928, the nationalist forces had advanced to the Yellow River. With the assistance of allied warlords including Yan Xishan and Feng Yuxiang, nationalist forces secured a series of decisive victories against the Beiyang Army. As they approached Beijing, Zhang Zuolin, leader of the Manchuria-based Fengtian clique, was forced to flee, and was assassinated shortly thereafter by the Japanese. His son, Zhang Xueliang, took over as the leader of the Fengtian clique, and in December 1928, announced that Manchuria would accept the authority of the nationalist government in Nanjing. With the final piece of China under KMT control, the Northern Expedition concluded successfully and China was reunified, heralding the start of the Nanjing decade.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Northern_Expedition
Northern Expedition. Retrieved 09. October 2020.

STORY

In July 1926, when Fourth Army divisions under Chang Fakuei and Ch’en Ming-shu arrived at the front, the combat changed from defensive to offensive. At that point, Wu’s main forces were still far off in North China and the Hunan allies on whom he relied were soon to be outnumbered by the KMT troops pouring in from Kwangtung.
It was in these circumstances that Wu’s governor, Chao Heng-t’i, defended himself during July and August along the north banks of two rivers tributary to Hunan’s major water course, the Hsiang. From late June to early July, the KMT prepared to ford the Lien River on the west of the Hsiang basin and the Lu River on the east. Down the Hsiang lay the provincial capital, Changsha. Poised along the Lu were two Fourth Army divisions and Yeh T’ing’s Independent Regiment from Canton and a Hunanese regiment of T’ang Sheng-chih as chaperone. On the Lien gathered the Kwangsi troops of the Seventh Army with the remainder of T’ang Sheng-chih’s Eighth Army. As the first major allied offensive began, T’ang had the status of general director of the Hunan front as well as acting provisional governor of Hunan. The presence of T’ang Sheng-chih and his troops
helped the Hunanese to identify with the movement instead of resisting the Northern Expedition as another incursion of outside troops - this time a "Cantonese" invasion.

The breakthrough along the Lien-Lu line began first with the Seventh and Eighth armies on the left wing on July 5. By the tenth, the Fourth Army elements on the right flank had joined the enemy in a battle that took the NRA down the valley through Changsha. In that eastern sector, Hunan bordered Kiangsi, a satrapy of Sun Ch’uan-fang, overlord of the lower Yangtze, where the NRA scrupulously avoided any provocation that would bring in Sun to aid Wu. For as long a period as possible, the KMT strategists wished to enjoy the advantage of taking on one adversary at a time.
The NRA also gained advantage from the flooding Yangtze, which backed water up the streams of northern Hunan and greatly slowed enemy communications from the north. With reinforcements from Wu’s headquarters at Wuhan thus impeded, his subordinates in Hunan faced the threat of being trapped in a vulnerable, outnumbered position. On Wu’s western flank, two Kweichow militarists watched ambiguously the tide of battle.
Their presence endangered the western end of Wu’s Hunan defenses. The poor growing season further strained the fouled communications in Hunan, since the defenders became unusually dependent on food from farther north at Wuhan, which even with the use of Wu’s Yangtze navy could not be moved in adequate amounts to the southern front. Also complicating the feeding of Wu’ forces was the passive resistance of Hunanese peasants who hid their produce from his supply masters. The loss of the Lien-Lu line left Changsha defenseless, so that on July 11 the defeated troops merely retreated through the provincial capital to a more defensible line to the north. By mid-July, General Director of the Hunan Front T’ang accepted the fruits of victory as he collaborated in setting up the provisional Hunan administration.

p. 85-86. Jordan, Donald A. (1976). The Northern Expedition: China's National Revolution of 1926-1928. Honolulu: University Press of Hawaii.