
GOLDEN SHANGHAI - 14 MAR 1927

The Northern Expedition, 1926-28

Chiahsing, Kiangsu Province - Southern China

Shanghai is within reach - but strong forces from the Shantung Army are blocking our advance. Our intelligence reports, that the outbreak of a communist revolt in Shanghai is imminent. We are officially still allied with the CCP, but we cannot allow the communists to gain upper hand in Shanghai. Find a way to overcome the enemy's defenses and occupy Shanghai before the mob creates facts!

ORDERS
Take all VHs.

CORE (13 units)
2x Tank
5x Infantry (+1)
2x AT (+1)
1x Recon
2x Arty
1x TB

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

STORY

To the south, the Eastern Route Command slowed as the enemy bombarded it with heavier artillery and as enemy reinforcements continued to arrive from Shantung during the second week of March. As the several spearheads pressed toward the rail link with the north, Shanghai’s defensibility became more precarious so that northern defense measures began to shift in emphasis from holding golden Shanghai to defending the Nanking area with its circle of rugged hills and the southern terminal of the Tsin-P’u Railroad across the river. By mid-March, indeed, some forces were being evacuated from Shanghai toward Nanking positions. The breakthrough for the Eastern Route force came on March 15 on the hills overlooking Lake T’ai when units succeeded in flanking enemy artillery placements. With that blockade eliminated by March 16, the NRA pincer pressed west against Lishui, a mere forty miles from Nanking. Around the east shore of the lake, the NRA was still effectively blocked by the superior artillery of the Shantung elements. However, this sector of the lower delta was rapidly losing its value for Sun. Mid-March reinforcements who arrived at Ch’angchou on the Nanking-Shanghai Railroad were turned back for reassignment around Nanking. From Wuhu, the NRA moved out around the enemy’s riverside defense line causing Tangt’u to be flanked and captured on March 17 at the same time the East Route force ground on into hilly ridges within fifty miles from Nanking where Sun had been headquartered. On the eighteenth, far to the north of the Yangtze, the Seventh Army captured Hofei with its routes leading to the coveted railway. With the diminishing defensibility of the delta area, the decision of the Shantung commander, Chang Tsung-ch’ang, was predictable. He ordered the general withdrawal of his forces from the Shanghai perimeter to better defense positions north of the Yangtze. With that, on March 19 Shanghai’s defenses began to crumple at the Sungchiang front and Pi Shu-ch’eng’s troops there retreated into the city toward the railroad station - but did not proceed to Nanking as ordered. According to foreign and Chinese press reports that followed, Pi Shu-eh’eng was awaiting the best circumstances for his defection to the NRA. He had apparently negotiated the turning over of Shanghai with a leading local KMT figure, Niu Yung-chien. This, along with the military strategy of the NRA of isolating Sun in South China, was a move toward the desired end of capturing Shanghai without either a bloody battle or gunfire that might provoke foreign intervention. When Sun’s order to evacuate Shanghai came down, although Pi Shu-ch’eng ignored it, there were other units there that were not a part of the arrangement with the KMT. Among them, a crack White Russian artillery continued to defend its position from an armored train as it retreated from Sungchiang back into the city. The NRA managed to flank the railroad artillery on March 20 with the assistance of another defection, that of the waterway police. Since the delta around Shanghai was a Cross hatch of canals, the defection and assistance of the local waterway police greatly eased the mobility of the attacking NRA. As it rapidly penetrated the front outside Shanghai from a multitude of routes, the northern line disintegrated all along the Nanking-Shanghai railway retreat route. Simultaneously, the city of Soochow and the sector from Ch’angchou to Henglin fell to the NRA. No aid came to Sun from the sea where, the preceding week, his admiral, Yang Shu-chuang, had steamed the fleet upriver and joined with the revolutionaries’ river fleet. Yang’s defection had been in the mill since August 1926, but he had timed his jointure with the NRA to coordinate with the Shanghai campaign. Thus, up to March 21, 1926, the planned bloodless occupation of Shanghai and avoidance of a coordinated foreign defense proceeded smoothly. However, on March 20, the Shanghai branch of CCP’s General Labor Union met and noted the entry of NRA units to Shanghai’s southwestern suburbs. The CCP’s interests in Shanghai did not coincide with those of the incoming NRA Eastern Route Command under Chiang’s domination. For the CCP, a tantalizing opportunity was presented as most of the northern defenders awaited to surrender while the NRA massed outside the city - thus creating a virtual vacuum of power. By moving quickly, the masses of the GLU could take unawares the northern soldiers and Shanghai police, who would be easily disarmed. The weapons thus gathered could arm GLU pickets who could then move to control the city for the CCP. In order to gather as many workers as possible, the GLU called another general strike, to commence the next day, March 21. On that day armed pickets attacked Pi Shu-ch’eng’s troops, the remnants of Sun’s elements, and the Shanghai police stations. This action gained for the GLU several police stations (which allowed control of the surrounding city districts) and considerable stores of weapons. Fighting between GLU members and police and resisting Shantung soldiers spread throughout the city. The northern soldiers fled in confusion through the city toward the railroad station and the coast, looting as they ran. Shells were lobbed from the armored train at attackers. As the conflict between workers and soldiers raged, fires flared up in the heavily populated areas. In the northern suburb of Ch’apei, the workers’ quarter near the train station, flames destroyed nearly 3,000 dwellings. The workers were the expendables in this struggle of the CCP to take the city. By the evening of March 22, Pai Ch’ung-hsi’s NRA units had moved in and occupied Shanghai.

p. 130-133. Jordan, Donald A. (1976). The Northern Expedition: China's National Revolution of 1926-1928. Honolulu: University Press of Hawaii.
