
KIANGSI SOVIET - 10 APR 1934

Chinese Civil War (first phase, 1927-37)

Lichuan, Kiangsi Province - Southern China

The setbacks in fight against communists in recent years did not discourage us - our will is unbroken! Our renewed attempt to eradicate the so-called Kiangsi Soviet will be successful, thanks to our new strategy and our determination. Your troops will attack from the north - the toughest task of the whole operation!

ORDERS
After 15 turns control 10/9/7 VHs for a BV/V/TV.

CORE (26 units)
4x Tank
6x Infantry
3x AT
2x Recon
2x Flak
4x Arty
2x Ftr  (+2)
3x TB

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

CHINESE CIVIL WAR

The Chinese Civil War was a civil war in China fought between the Kuomintang (KMT)-led government of the Republic of China (ROC) and the Communist Party of China (CPC) lasting intermittently between 1927 and 1949. The war is generally divided into two phases with an interlude: from August 1927 to 1937, the KMT-CPC Alliance collapsed during the Northern Expedition, and the Nationalists controlled most of China. From 1937 to 1945, hostilities were put on hold, and the Second United Front fought the Japanese invasion of China with eventual help from the Allies of World War II. The civil war resumed with the Japanese defeat, and the CPC gained the upper hand in the final phase of the war from 1945 to 1949, generally referred to as the Chinese Communist Revolution.

The Communists gained control of mainland China and established the People's Republic of China (PRC) in 1949, forcing the leadership of the Republic of China to retreat to the island of Taiwan. A lasting political and military standoff between the two sides of the Taiwan Strait ensued, with the ROC in Taiwan and the PRC in mainland China both officially claiming to be the legitimate government of all China. No armistice or peace treaty has ever been signed, and debate continues as to whether the civil war has legally ended.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_Civil_War
Chinese Civil War. 09. October 2020.

FIFTH ENCIRCLEMENT CAMPAIGN AGAINST THE JIANGXI SOVIET

The fifth encirclement campaign against Jiangxi Soviet was a series of battles fought during the Chinese Civil War from 25 September 1933, to October 1934 between Chiang Kai-shek's Kuomintang (nationalist) and the Chinese communists. During this campaign, the Kuomintang successfully overran the communist Chinese Soviet Republic and forced the communists on the run, an event later known as the Long March. Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang termed this campaign as the fifth encirclement campaign, whilst the Chinese communists termed it as the fifth counter-encirclement campaign at the Central Soviet, also known as the fifth counter-encirclement campaign at the Central Revolutionary Base or fifth extermination campaign.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fifth_encirclement_campaign_against_the_Jiangxi_Soviet
Fifth encirclement campaign against the Jiangxi Soviet. 09. October 2020.

STORY

When the NRA was ready to attack, it was too late for the Red Army to begin to prepare for the encirclement. The only positive area of improvement was the size of the Red Army. During the summer, the Red Army touted the slogan "Million Man Army" to recruit soldiers during its mobilization operations. By late October, the Red Army had reached 100,000. However, with that many soldiers, the Red Army required even more supplies and equipment. With the Eastern Front Army in Fujian, the Central Front Army and the local populace did not start raising revenues and hoarding supplies, especially rice and salt, until late August. The lack of preparation would have deleterious effects in the future.
On September 25, 1933, the NRA sent three divisions south from Nanchang and attacked Lichuan. Within three days, the city fell, which surprised the CCP. The Central Front Red Army fell back and waited for the Eastern Front Red Army to rush back from Fujian to reinforce their position. On October 6, the Central and Eastern Front Red Armies combined forces and conducted a counterattack. The initial attack near Xunkou was successful, with the Red Army destroying three NRA brigades. However, future attempts were less successful. For two months, the Red Army attacked NRA blockhouses at Xiaoshi, Zixi, Huwan Bajiaoting, Yuangai Mountain, and Daxiongguan, but each attempt to break the line was unsuccessful. Using the concrete blockhouses as pillboxes, the NRA concentrated fires from new German machine guns, German artillery pieces, and aerial bombs on Red Army formations as they assaulted the line. In November 1933, the battles took a tactical pause as the Fujian Incident temporarily diverted the KMT’s attention from the Jiangxi Soviet.
After the Fujian Incident, the NRA restarted operations from the Northern Front. The NRA established a line of blockhouses from Lichuan to Le’an, and began a methodical clearing operation south towards Ruijin with thirty-five NRA divisions. Its first target was the city of Guangchang, which was halfway between Nanchang and Ruijin. The NRA’s Eastern Front also began its movement west. The Fujian incident actually benefited the NRA, forcing it to reorganize and move forces to the east. The Eastern Route NRA Army was reorganized with the remnants of the Nineteenth Route NRA Army, making it a total of fourteen divisions, to conduct operations from Western Fujian. By March 1934, the NRA Northern and Eastern Fronts linked up by Deshengguan, Jiangxi Province, and began a coordinated movement towards Guangchang.
In response to the NRA movement towards Guangchang, the Red Army built a series of fortifications and trenches to defend the territory. On April 9, the NRA began its attack on Guangchang, deploying Third Route NRA Army’s ten divisions from Nanfeng, with artillery and aircrafts providing covering fire. The NRA forces moved south along both sides of the Xu River leading up to Guangchang. The Northern Route NRA Army established blockhouses on one side of the river, before advancing and clearing the other side, alternating on each bank as it moved south. The operation took about two weeks for the NRA to push down the river and reach Guangchang. By April 23, 1934, the NRA broke through the Red Army’s lines of defense and occupied the high ground surrounding Guangchang. The Red Army retreated to the city and constructed more fortified defenses and trench lines. On April 27, 1934, the NRA conducted artillery and air bombardments, breaking the Red Army’s wooden fortifications and trench lines. The next day, the NRA invaded the city and Guangchang fell, forcing the Red Army to retreat south. The Red Army lost 5,093 soldiers, approximately 20 percent of the fighting force at Guangchang, whereas the NRA only sustained 2,000 casualties.
After Guangchang, the NRA continued its march from all four directions. From the west, Western Front NRA forces occupied both Shaxi and Longgang by May 1. On the eastern front, Eastern Route NRA forces continued to push through and seized Jianning on May 16. By June the CCP felt the pressures of the attacks. The combination of the blockade and baojia worked to drain away local support for the CCP. The attrition style battle also began to decrease the quality of leadership and the level of experience in the Red Army. The lines were increasingly filled by inexperienced soldiers who, under pressure, often deserted, further degrading the Red Army’s effectiveness. The lack of supplies and food further reduced the Red Army morale and support for the offensive line among the public. Support for the offensive line slowly ended, even within military and party publications. Magazines began promoting the expansion of guerrilla operations to conserve resources. Recruitment campaigns to replenish losses made little difference as the superior NRA strategy continued to slowly strangle the Soviet and shrink it from seventeen counties to ten. In the summer of 1934, the Red Army began to look at new strategies. It established a new defensive perimeter from Ninghua to Ningdu to Xingguo. In May, the Central Committee held a meeting and decided the current offensive strategy was not working, which most likely would require the Red Army to evacuate the Soviet. The Committee requested permission from the COMINTERN to change strategy, which was approved a few days later with the emphasis that the CCP’s main task was to protect the combat strength of the Red Army. While the COMINTERN approved the strategy, Braun and Bo Gu had a different plan of accomplishing it. Instead of planning for the immediate withdrawal of the Soviet, they pushed for a final struggle, calling for everyone to give their maximum effort to defend the Soviet and achieve victory. Besides the change in slogan, the Red Army also continued its strong positional defensive strategy, creating wooden blockhouses and trenches to defend the territory. The CCP also authorized the expansion of guerrilla warfare on all fronts to defeat the NRA.
The NRA conducted another offensive in July, targeting the city of Shicheng, set between Ninghua and Ningdu as its penetration point. The two sides engaged in a bitter struggle along this final defense line for about a month. In early August, the Red Army delivered a strong counterattack against the NRA at the battle of Gaohunao, causing more than 4,000 NRA casualties. However, the Red Army also suffered large losses and was forced to withdraw to the final defensive line just north of Shicheng. At Shicheng, the Red Army held the NRA to a stalemate. Finally, the NRA brought up twelve large howitzers to assist in the siege and finally broke through the line in August. The city of Shicheng ended up falling in October. The defense of Shicheng cost the Red Army 5,000 casualties, severely wounding it and forced the leadership to contemplate some drastic measures. The Jiangxi Soviet was reduced to a small area surrounding Ruijin and Xingguo. Given all the casualties and the looming NRA attack on Ruijin, the Red Army executed a daring retreat from Jiangxi on October 10, 1934, ending the Fifth Extermination Campaign, and starting the Long March.

p. 121-124 Hsu, Wilbur W. (1999). Survival Through Adaptation: The Chinese Red Army and the Extermination Campaigns, 1927-1936. West Point, N.Y.: Combat Studies Institute Press.
