
RAID ON RABAUL - 5 Nov 1943

USS Saratoga, South of Rabaul, Bismarck Archipelago
CO Admiral Frederick Sherman

Perform an Air Strike against the warships anchor in the port of Rabaul. Overcome the Japanese fighter screen and destroy as many ships as possible. 

Find and destroy at last 5 of 7 enemy cruisers and prevent the retreat of 7 enemy ships via exit point.


TIP

Note that torpedo bombers must over an ocean hex, to attack an adjacent Naval unit. 


THE STORY

On Bouganville the Japanese had two airfields in the southern tip of the island, and another at the northernmost peninsula, with a fourth on Buki just across the northern passage. Instead of landing his forces near the Japanese airfields and taking them away against the bulk of the Japanese defenders, Admiral William Halsey landed his invasion force of 14,000 marines at Empress Augusta Bay, about halfway up the west coast of Bouganville. There he had his Seabees clear and build their own airfield. Two days after the landing Admiral Mineichi Koga sent a large cruiser force down from Japan to Rabaul in preparation for a night engagement against Halsey's screening force and supply ships in Empress Augusta Bay. The Japanese had been conserving their naval forces over the past year, but now committed a force of seven heavy cruisers, along with one light cruiser and four destroyers. At Rabaul the force refueled in preparation for the coming night battle.

Halsey had no surface forces anywhere near equivalent strength to oppose them. The battleships Washington and South Dakota and assorted cruisers had been transferred to the Central Pacific to support the upcoming invasion of Tarawa. Other than the destroyer screen for the transports, the only force Halsey had available were the carrier airgroups on Saratoga and Princeton. Rabaul was a heavily fortified port. With five airfields and extensive anti-aircraft batteries, the navy fliers considered it a hornet's nest. Up to that point in the war, other than the surprise raid at Pearl Harbor no mission against such a heavily defended target had ever been undertaken using carrier aircraft. It was a highly dangerous mission for the aircrews, and jeopardized the carriers as well. Halsey later said the threat the Japanese cruiser force at Rabaul posed to his landings at Bouganville was "the most desperate emergency that confronted me in my entire term as ComSoPac."

With the landing in the balance, Halsey sent his two carriers under the command of Rear-Admiral Frederick Sherman to steam north through the night to get into range of Rabaul, then launch a daybreak raid on the base. Approaching behind the cover of a weather front, Sherman launched all 97 of his available aircraft against Rabaul. Aircraft from Barakoma Airfield on recently captured Vella Lavella were sent out to intercept the task group and provide some measure of air cover. Back at Rabaul, the carrier force drove their attack home. Under orders to make preference of damaging more ships rather than sinking a few, the air strike was a stunning success, inflicting damage on most units of the cruiser force and neutralizing it as a threat. The daybreak bombing of Rabaul was followed up an hour later with a raid by 27 B-24 Liberator heavy bombers of the Fifth Air Force, escorted by 58 P-38s. Most of the Japanese warships returned to Truk the next day to receive repairs and get them out of range of further Allied airstrikes. A serious threat had been neutralized.
