
MAKIN ISLAND - 1 Feb 1942

USS Yorktown, Marshall and Gilbert Islands
CO Admiral Frank J. Fletcher

Attack the Japanese seaplane station on Makin Atoll and destroy 2 of 3 as MSU (Must Survive Unit) marked enemy units. Expect that enemy fighters may be trying to intercept you.

BUY: 1 x SBD Dauntless


TIP

Over the Deploy/Exit hexes, an aircraft unit can enter and leave the map. They are NOT suitable for supplying aircraft units. If you move an aircraft over an Deploy/Exit hex, it leaves the map for the rest of the scenario. What are the reasons you should use the Exit hexes:

1) Your aircraft is short of fuel and threatens to crash.
2) Your aircraft has no more ammunition and can not intervene in fight.
3) Your aircraft has suffered heavy losses and threatens to be destroyed.


THE STORY

On 31 January 1942, Yorktown (TF-17) and Enterprise (TF-8) parted company. The objectives for the Yorktown Task Force were Jaluit, the seat of government in the Japanese Marshall Islands Mandate, and Makin and Mili Atolls, located at the northernmost point of the Gilbert chain. The Enterprise Task Force continued steaming further northward to raid Kwajalein, Wotje, and Maloelap in the Marshall Islands.

Screened only by cruisers USS Louisville (CA-28) and USS St Louis (CL-49), Yorktown approached her objectives in the pre-dawn darkness of 1 February 1942. Her four destroyer escorts had been detached the previous night to form a scouting line. At 0415 hours Yorktown went to flight quarters, and launched eleven Douglas TBD-1 Devastator torpedo bombers and seventeen Douglas SBD-3 Dauntless scout bombers. The air strike was led by Commander Curtis W. Smiley.

The Jaluit attack group had to battle rain squalls all the way to the objective, and over Jaluit they encountered a fierce tropical thunderstorm that scattered an already ragged formation. Despite the foul weather, and very poor visibility, an uncoordinated attack on Jaluit was pressed home by squadron sections and individual aircraft. Yorktown's aircraft attacked the few Japanese shore installations and shipping that could be seen in the murky conditions. Little damage was done and six Yorktown aircraft failed to return from the Jaluit raid. Appalling weather conditions or running out of fuel appear to have been responsible for these losses. Two SBDs took off from Yorktown and were never seen again. Two TBDs were forced to ditch off Jaluit. The crews reached shore where they were taken prisoner by the Japanese. Two downed TBDs were seen in the sea by aircraft returning to Yorktown and their approximate location was reported. Some stragglers from the Jaluit raid touched down on Yorktown with only a couple of gallons of fuel left in their tanks.

Other Yorktown aircraft looked for Japanese installations and ships at Makin Atoll. Here the weather conditions were better, and Yorktown's SBDs destroyed two large Kawanishi four-engine H6K flying boats (code-named "Mavis" by the Allies) and severely damaged a seaplane tender, the Nagata Maru. At Mili Atoll, Yorktown's pilots found nothing to attack.


