
WAKE ISLAND RAID - 6 Oct 1943

USS Essex, East of Wake Island, North Pacific
CO Admiral A. E. Montgomery

Perform an Air Strike against Wake Island. Overcome the Japanese fighter screen and destroy as many military installations as possible. 

Find and destroy at last 8 of 12 enemy MSU's on Wake Island.

BUY: 2 x F6F-3 Hellcat
BUY: 2 x SB2C Helldiver
BUY: 1 x TBF Avenger

UPG: 2 x F4F-4 Wildcat -> F6F-3 Hellcat
UPG: 2 x SBD Dauntless -> SB2C Helldiver
or
BUY: unit attachments


THE STORY

Wake Island, really three little islands, is shaped like a big V. I’m not sure why, but the decision was made to attack down the middle - from the open end to the point. The problem with this was, every Japanese soldier and sailor on that island had a shot at us. Their radar had warned them we were coming, and now a huge arc of white and yellow and red tracers reached up at us from each arm of the island. It was so thick that in the still-dim early morning light it looked solid!

Our dive-bombers tipped over into their dives, and we pushed over after them. A few seconds later we flashed past them, picking out targets as we plunged toward the airfield. The amount of antiaircraft fire was terrifying. It didn’t seem possible that anyone could fly through unscathed.

Mike Hadden led Jack Kitchen, Bud Gehoe, and me on a strafing run against one of the hangars on the airfield. It was satisfying to hear the booming chatter from my guns and see the tracers slam into the structure. As I lifted my airplane up to clear the hangar, I released the trigger and looked to my right before I turned. I was not only looking for antiaircraft fire and enemy fighters, but also checking to make sure I didn’t run into another Hellcat. This was a very real danger. Through the war many of our airplanes were lost because they collided over the target.

Amazed and thankful that I had not been hit, I pulled into a hard, climbing right turn and headed back toward our rendezvous point southeast of the island. As I passed through about eight thousand feet, I spotted a Zero almost at my eleven o’clock position. It was about two thousand feet above me, crossing from left to right, almost tail-on.

With a quick dip of my right wing, I turned slightly to the right and closed from directly below and behind. It took only a moment or so to close the range to about three hundred feet. It felt like a week. Finally I lifted the nose of my F6F slightly and settled the pipper of my gunsight on the belly of the enemy fighter.

I fired a short burst - about one second - and the Zero exploded. Next, I banked hard left to clear the explosion and checked behind me for another enemy fighter. It would be a tragedy to shoot down a Zero and get bagged by his wingman.

The sky seemed clear of enemy fighters, so I turned back toward our rendezvous point. A short time later I spotted another Zero a half-mile or so ahead of me, going in the same direction in a shallow dive. I started down after him and was gaining slowly when a bright stream of red tracers flashed over my canopy from behind. Without thinking, I kicked my F6F into a hard snap roll to the right and dove away, straight down.

As I rolled and looked back over my shoulder, I was stunned to see another F6F, still well behind me and obviously far out of range of the Zero. Undeterred by the impossible distance, he continued to fire at the enemy fighter, his rounds falling harmlessly in a long arc into the ocean. I’m sure the idiot never even saw me. Thanks to his bungling, neither one of us got that Zero.

After one or two more strafing runs I flew to the rendezvous point, joined with the other Hellcats, and escorted the bombers back to the Essex. I was very excited about my first aerial victory and made my way around the ship to compare notes with other pilots. The new skipper, Phil Torrey, had gotten into a dogfight with three Zeros, shot down one, and escaped the other two by dodging into a bank of clouds. After our first strafing run Hadden and Kitchen had tangled with four Zeros and shared credit for shooting down one. Hadden’s plane was badly shot up, though, and he almost didn’t make it back.
