
ATTACK ON YOKOSUKA - 18 Jul 1945

USS Essex, Southeast of Tokyo Bay, Pacific Ocean
CO Admiral John S. McCain

You will lead an air strike against the Tokyo area. The main objective of the attack is the battleship Nagato, which anchor in the Yokosuka Naval Arsenal. Furthermore, attack the airfields and destroy as many planes as possible on the ground. The hangars are full of aircraft, which are intended for kamikaze missions. If these goals are achieved, select further targets in its sole discretion. British Royal Navy aircraft will assist you.

Find and destroy at last 48 of 51 enemy air-, sea- and ground-MSU's.

UPG: 4 x F6F-5 Hellcat -> F8F Bearcat
or
BUY: unit attachments


THE STORY

The attack on Yokosuka began at about 3:30 pm on 18 July. The first wave of American aircraft attacked the anti-aircraft batteries around the naval base, and succeeded in neutralizing them. Following this, the aircraft of VF-88 attacked Nagato with bombs. A 500 pound general-purpose bomb struck the battleship's bridge, killing her commanding officer, Rear Admiral Otsuka Miki as well as the executive officer and at least nine other men. Another 500 pound bomb later struck Nagato and detonated near her officer's mess, killing about 22 sailors and knocking out four 25 mm guns. The only other direct hit on the ship was made by a 5-inch (130 mm) shell or rocket which did not explode. In addition, 60 bombs landed in the harbor near Nagato, causing breaches to her double hull which let 2,000 tons of water into the ship. By the time the attack concluded at 4:10 pm, 35 of the battleship's 967 officers and men had been killed. The overall damage to the ship was later assessed as being light.

American aircraft also attacked several other ships docked at Yokosuka. The unfinished Matsu class destroyer Yaezakura broke in two and sank after being bombed, and the submarine I-372 was destroyed by another bomb; at the time the submarine's crew was ashore and did not suffer any fatalities. Two escort vessels and a torpedo boat were also sunk. In addition to these losses, five other ships, including the obsolete destroyer Yakaze and training ships Fuji and Kasuga were damaged. Despite their proximity to Nagato, Fukugawa Maru and Ushio were not damaged. The British and United States aircraft dispatched against airfields claimed to have destroyed 43 Japanese aircraft and damaged another 77. The pilots of these aircraft also claimed the destruction of several railway locomotives. Allied losses in the attacks made on 18 July were 12 U.S. Navy aircraft, two Royal Navy aircraft and 18 aircrew. The Allied pilots were disappointed they had not sunk Nagato, despite the battleship being the primary target of the raid.
