
TURNING POINT - 4 Jun 1942

USS Yorktown, near Midway Atoll
CO Admiral Frank J. Fletcher

The great enemy carrier group that has attacked Midway is sighted. You will lead the air strike against this forces. The situation is convenient, the enemy is busy with preparations for his second strike and can't launch aircraft at time. Take your chance and destroy the enemy fleet carriers!

Sink 3 of 4 enemy carriers and prevent the retreat of more than one enemy ship via exit point. 

UPG: 1 x F4F-3 Wildcat -> F4F-4 Wildcat
or
BUY: unit attachments


THE STORY

By chance, at the same time VT-3 was sighted by the Japanese, three squadrons of American SBDs from Enterprise and Yorktown (VB-6, VS-6 and VB-3, respectively) were approaching from the southwest and northeast. The Yorktown squadron (VB-3) had flown just behind VT-3 but elected to attack from a different course. The two squadrons from Enterprise were running low on fuel because of the time spent looking for the enemy. However, squadron commander C. Wade McClusky, Jr. decided to continue the search and by good fortune spotted the wake of the Japanese destroyer Arashi. The destroyer was steaming at full speed to rejoin Nagumo's carriers after having unsuccessfully depth-charged U.S. submarine Nautilus, which had earlier unsuccessfully attacked the battleship Kirishima. Some bombers were lost from fuel exhaustion before the attack commenced.

McClusky's decision to continue the search and his judgment, in the opinion of Admiral Chester Nimitz, "decided the fate of our carrier task force and our forces at Midway...." All three American dive-bombers squadrons (VB-6, VS-6 and VB-3) arrived almost simultaneously at the perfect time, locations and altitudes to attack. Most of the Japanese CAP was focusing on the torpedo planes of VT-3 and were out of position, armed Japanese strike aircraft filled the hangar decks, fuel hoses snaked across the decks as refueling operations were hastily completed, and the repeated change of ordnance meant bombs and torpedoes were stacked around the hangars, rather than stowed safely in the magazines, making the Japanese carriers extraordinarily vulnerable.

Beginning at 10:22, the two squadrons of Enterprise's air group split up and attacked two targets. However, a miscommunication initially caused both of the squadrons to dive at the Kaga. Lieutenant Commander Richard Halsey Best and his two wingmen were able to pull out of their dives and headed north to attack Akagi. Coming under an onslaught from almost two full squadrons, Kaga was hit by four or five bombs, which caused heavy damage and starting fires that could not be extinguished. One of the bombs landed near the bridge, killing most of the senior officers.

Several minutes later, Best and his two wingmen dove on the Akagi. Although Akagi sustained only one direct hit (almost certainly dropped by Lieutenant Commander Best), it nonetheless proved to be a fatal blow; the bomb struck the edge of the mid-ship deck elevator and penetrated to the upper hangar deck, where it exploded among the armed and fueled aircraft there. Another bomb exploded underwater very close astern; the resulting geyser bent the flight deck upward and also caused crucial rudder damage.

Simultaneously, Yorktown's VB-3, commanded by Max Leslie, went for Soryu, scoring at least three hits and causing extensive damage. Simultaneously, VT-3 targeted Hiryu, which was hemmed in among Soryu, Kaga, and Akagi, but achieved no hits.

Within six minutes, Soryu and Kaga were ablaze from stem to stern, as fires continued to spread through the ships. Akagi, having been struck by only one bomb, would take longer to burn, but the resulting fires quickly expanded and soon proved impossible to extinguish; she too was eventually consumed by the flames. Despite initial hopes that Akagi could be saved or at least towed back to Japan, all three carriers were eventually abandoned and scuttled.
