
TARIGO CONVOY - 16 Apr 1941

Mediterranean Sea off the Kerkennah Islands, Tunisia
CO Captain Philip Mack

Enemy messages about an Italian/German convoy from Naples en route to Tripoli were received. Intercept the convoy and destroy him!

Sink 4 of 5 MSU's before more than one enemy ship reach the nearest Axis harbor (escape point).

UPG: 2 x J/N-Class Destroyer -> Tribal-Class Destroyer
or
BUY: unit attachments


THE STORY

In mid-April, 1941, a five ship convoy sailed from Naples, en route to Tripoli. It consisted of four German troopships (Adana, Arta, Aegina and Iserlhon) and an Italian ammunition ship, the Sabaudia. The convoy was escorted by a Navigatori class destroyer, Luca Tarigo (flagship) and two Folgore class destroyers, Baleno and Lampo, commanded by Captain Pietro de Cristofaro. They were delayed by bad weather, sailing in the evening of 13th April.

The British had been forewarned of their passage by intercepted messages and, on the 15th, the convoy was sighted and shadowed by a British Maryland reconnaissance plane on the 15th Aptil. Two Italian SM.79s that were ordered to provide air cover did not arrive, due to the continuing bad weather. On the night of the 16th, the convoy was intercepted by the British 14th Destroyer Flotilla - HMS Jervis (flagship), HMS Janus, HMS Nubian and HMS Mohawk - commanded by Captain Philip Mack. At least three of these destroyers were equipped with radar. The encounter took place as the Italian convoy maneuvered around the shallow waters surrounding the Kerkennah Islands.

The Italian convoy was ambushed by the British force after passing off one of the buoys marking the sandbanks nearby. The battle took place at short range, from 2000 to 50 yards between the warships. The British destroyers' radar enabled them to surprise the Italians in a night attack and destroy the convoy, sinking all the transports and the three destroyers (although the Lampo was run aground and later salvaged after a four month effort). The flotilla commander, Captain de Cristofaro, on board the Tarigo, had his leg shot off and later died of his wounds; he was posthumously awarded the Medaglia d'Oro (the highest Italian military decoration). While sinking, the Tarigo, now under the command of the only surviving officer, Ensign Ettore Bisagno, hit HMS Mohawk with two torpedoes. Mohawk was subsequently scuttled by HMS Jervis and settled on the sandy bottom at a depth of 12 mt. The outcome of the battle marked the end of the relatively unopposed Axis transport to Libya, which they had enjoyed since June 1940.
