
OPERATION ABSTENTION - 28 Feb 1941

Island of Kastelorizo, Eastern Aegean Sea
CO Captain H. J. Egerton

Our Commando soldiers, who conquered the tiny Italian island of Kastelorizo off the Turkish coast recently, are attacked by superior enemy forces. We have no other choice but to evacuate the island again. Cover with your ships the withdraw of our troops!

The commando must survive and reach the escape point. A submarine is waiting to embark the soldiers at the port of Kastelorizo. Embark the commando and cover the retreat of the submarine to the escape point against enemy attacks. 


THE STORY

The leading force was composed by 200 commandos, who were transported by the destroyers HMS Decoy and Hereward. A 24-man detachment of Royal Marines was on board the gunboat HMS Ladybird. The flotilla sailed from Suda Bay on 24 February. The initial plan was to build-up a beachhead in the island for only 24 hours, before the arrival of a Sherwood Foresters company to consolidate the British garrison. This second force would come from Cyprus on board the armed yacht HMS Rosaura and escorted by the light cruisers HMAS Perth and HMS Bonaventure. Before dawn, the commandos and the Royal Marines started to land at the main port of the island, after the submarine HMS Parthian made a previous reconnaissance of the coast. The Italian presence at Kastelorizo consisted of a small and miscellaneous unit of soldiers and agents of the Guardia di Finanza in charge of a wireless station. The British troops took the garrison by surprise, seizing the radio outpost. Twelve of the servicemen were taken prisoners. Before the commandos could overrun them, the Italians sent an alert to Rhodes, the main Italian air and naval base in the Dodecanese.

Only a few hours later, aircraft of the Regia Aeronautica (Italian Royal Air Force) appeared over the island. The bombers targeted the harbour, the castle, and the main hills of the small island where the commandos were entrenched. During one of these raids, HMS Ladybird was struck by a bomb, which resulted in three seamen wounded. The vessel, already short of fuel to continue her mission, was forced to reload the Royal Marines party and to make for Haifa. A consequence of the withdrawal of the gunship was the loss of the radio link of the commandos with Alexandria.

The show of force by the Regia Marina (Royal Italian Navy) took place at sunrise on the 27th. The torpedo boats Lupo and Lince started the landing of about 240 soldiers north of the port, while their 3.9 in (99 mm) guns pounded the British positions, specially the docks and the Governor's palace. Three commandos were killed and seven injured. Meanwhile, HMS Hereward, warned by the commandos ashore of the Italian naval activity, decided then to join Decoy, at the time about 40 mi (35 nmi; 64 km) away from the coast. The Commander of the operation ordered the warships to disrupt the Italian landings, but the destroyer flotilla was unable to find the enemy warships. Hereward reported to the Commander-in-Chief that the Italian surface action would make extremely dangerous the landing of the main British force from Rosaura, already compromised by the air attacks on the harbour. Therefore, the garrison landing was postponed and rearranged. The disembarkment would be carried out by the destroyers Decoy and Hero, after transboarding the Sherwood Foresters company from Rosaura. All ships were ordered to Alexandria to complete the reschedule. To make things worst, Admiral Renouf was listed as sick and replaced by Captain Egerton, commander of HMS Bonaventure. At the same time, the high seas also forced the Italian navy to suspend the landings until the morning of the 28th. The Italian forces already inland continued to harass the exhausted and isolated British commandos, who were equipped only for a 24-hour action. The Italian squadron returned some hours later, reinforced with two destroyers from Leros, the Crispi and the Sella, and two MAS motor-launches, unloading the remainder of the land contingent and resuming the shelling. The pressure by air and sea made the British troops' situation untenable. Indeed, when the forces from Alexandria came in on the 28th, the company’s commander, Major Cooper, after conferencing with the other chiefs responsible for the operation, realized that without sustained naval and air support, the withdrawal was unavoidable. The bulk of the land forces, isolated on a small plateau in the easternmost point of Kastelorizo was therefore reembarked. The Italian troops surrounded and eventually captured a number of commandos who were left behind. While providing protection to the retreat, HMS Jaguar was targeted by two torpedoes fired by Crispi, which failed to hit her. Jaguar responded with her 4.7 in (120 mm) guns, but the jamming of a searchlight prevented her from striking home. After this last fruitless action, the British force sailed back to Alexandria. The destroyers HMS Nubian, Hasty and Jaguar - in a further sweep between Rhodes and Kastelorizo - were unable to intercept the returning Italian warships.
