
OPERATION AGREEMENT - 14 Sep 1942

Western Mediterranean, near Tobruk
CO Captain Ronald J. R. Dendy

Support our commandos in an assault on Tobruk! Goal is to destroy as many enemy facilities as possible. Finish your work of destruction before the enemy can introduce superior forces. 

Find and destroy 23 of 25 enemy MSU's in and around Tobruk!

UPG: 1 x Crown Colony-Class Light Cruiser -> County-Class Heavy Cruiser
or
BUY: unit attachments


THE STORY

The main attack on Tobruk suffered from poor planning and coordination. First, British Commandos from the submarine HMS Taku failed to set up beacons on the shore to guide the main British force due to bad sea conditions. The expected garrison had been strengthened and British destroyers bringing in the seaborne troops landed their troops on a beach far to the west of the intended one. Another seaborne landing - comprising motor launches and boats - partially failed to reach the planned landing point. Only two Motor Torpedo Boats (MTB)s entered a small cove to land members of the Royal Northumberland Fusiliers, but one of them was hit and became stranded in the shallow water.

Allied strength for Operation Agreement involved an amphibious seaborne force of about 400 Royal Marines, 180 Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, Army Engineers and about 150 SAS coming from the desert. Losses amounted to about 300 Royal Marines, 160 Army, 280 Royal Navy, one cruiser (HMS Coventry), two destroyers (HMS Sikh and Zulu), two motor launches, four MTBs and several small craft. MTB 314, a boat which was damaged and ran aground during the battle, was captured by the German harbour minesweeper R-10 at dawn with 117 seamen and soldiers on board. Dozens of British seamen and marines were rescued from the sea by the Italian torpedo boat Castore, a flotilla of German harbour minesweepers and several Italian motor barges, which also seized a couple of makeshift amphibious craft attempting to reach Alexandria at very low speed. German and Italian losses were 16 killed and 50 wounded.
