
CAPE BON - 13 Dec 1941

Mediterranean Sea, Cape Bon, Tunisia
CO Captain G.H. Stokes

We own information, and do not ask me where this information comes from, that the Italian 4th Cruiser Division is with important supply goods on their way to Tripoli. Intercept the enemy formation near Cape Bon and destroy them.

Sink all 3 of 3 MSU's before an enemy ship can reach the nearest Axis harbor (escape point).

UPG: 2 x J/N-Class Destroyer -> Tribal-Class Destroyer
or
BUY: unit attachments


THE STORY

The Italian 4th Cruiser Division, commanded by Contrammiraglio Antonino Toscano and consisting of the two Da Giussano class light cruisers Alberto da Giussano and Alberico da Barbiano and the Spica class torpedo boat Cigno, sailed from Palermo bound for Tripoli, carrying an urgent supply of aircraft fuel (nearly 2,000 tons). The fuel was vitally needed by fighters based in Libya and space was limited, forcing the crew to place tanks on the decks of the ships.

In the meantime, the British 4th Destroyer flotilla, consisting of four warships (the destroyers HMS Sikh, Maori, Legion and the Dutch destroyer Hr. Ms. Isaac Sweers, commanded by Commander G. H. Stokes), was sailing to join the Mediterranean Fleet at Alexandria.

The Allied flotilla was spotted by an Italian aircraft but Regia Marina headquarters concluded that the British would not be able to reach Cape Bon before the 4th Cruiser Division was passed. However, the British, with intercepted signals from Ultra, ordered their destroyers to intercept the Axis cruisers.

The two forces met near Cape Bon On December 13 at 3:25 AM. Arriving from astern under the cover of darkness and using radar, the Allies surprised their adversaries, launching torpedoes and opening fire at short range. Di Giussano managed to fire only three salvos during the battle. Both Italian cruisers were sunk, Alberico da Barbiano became a blazing inferno. After a brief encounter with the Dutch destroyer Isaac Sweers, Cigno rescued at least 500 survivors, while others reached the coast or were later saved by Italian motor torpedo boats (or MAS). Over 900 men lost their lives, including Admiral Toscano.

The entire battle had lasted a mere five minutes.
