
WOLFPACK - 16 Oct 1940

Western Approaches, Atlantic ocean
CO Captain Lachlan D. I. Mackinnon

Convoy SC-7 sailed from Sydney on 5 October 1940 now entered the dangerous zone, the Western Approaches. Take over the command of the convoy escort and protect the convoy against attacking enemy submarines.

25 of 35 MSU's must reach the escape points, so not more than 10 MSU's should be sunk by the Germans. The convoy ships are controlled by the AI and you command the ships responsible for the defense of the convoy. Take care that your corvettes are not the only targets within range of the German U-boats! 


THE STORY

The first attacks

The convoy sailed on Saturday 5 October 1940. On the first day, one ship, the SS Winona dropped out with mechanical trouble, and had to return.

As bad weather set in on the 11th, several ships became separated, and were forced to sail independently. One of these, the SS Trevisa, was a small Canadian Laker of 1,813 tons with a cargo of lumber destined for Scotland. She was sighted by U-124 on the 16th and sunk. Another, the Greek freighter SS Aenos was seen by U-38, and sunk on 17th; but SS Eaglescliffe Hall, another Laker, avoided this fate, and was able to rescue survivors from Aenos, before arriving safely at Rothesay on the 19th. A fourth straggler regained the convoy on the 15th.

On the 17th as the convoy entered the Western Approaches Scarborough was joined by the sloop Fowey and the new corvette Bluebell. Later that day they were sighted by U-48, which attacked, sinking two ships including the tanker Languedoc. Scarborough counter-attacked, driving U-48 deep so she was unable to shadow or report. However the attack was prolonged unwisely, and the convoy moved so far ahead Scarborough was unable to rejoin.

On the 18th SC 7 was joined by the sloop Leith, and the corvette Heartsease, and Leith assumed command. Later that day U-38, sighted the convoy and attacked, damaging SS Carsbreck. Leith and Heartsease attacked without success, though U-38 was driven off, and Heartsease was detailed to escort Carsbreck home, weakening the escort further.

The night of the U-boats

On the night of 18th/19th five boats made a concerted attack. They were U-46, U-99, U-100, U-101 and U-123. U-99 was captained by the famous ace Korvettenkapitän Otto Kretschmer. The attack was coordinated from Lorient by Admiral Karl Dönitz and his staff.

An early casualty was the iron ore ship, SS Creekirk, bound for Cardiff, Wales. With her heavy cargo, she sank like a stone, taking all 36 crew members with her. Later that night, SC 7 lost many of its members, including the SS Empire Brigade with her cargo of trucks and six of her crew and the SS Fiscus with her cargo of steel ingots from Sydney. She sank like a stone as well, taking with her 38 of her 39 man crew. Also among the casualties was the commodore's ship, SS Assyrian, down with 17 crew (though Commodore Mackinnon was rescued after a long immersion in the chilly waters). In all, 16 ships were lost in this six hour period.

On 18 October, SS Blairspey was torpedoed by U-101 and was abandoned. She was torpedoed again on 19 October by U-100 but remained afloat. She was towed to the Clyde and later repaired at Greenock.

The escorts were unable to prevent any of these losses; their responses were uncoordinated and ineffective. They never realised that the attacking submarines did not attack submerged or from outside the convoy, but were actually running surfaced between the ships inside the convoy. Therefore the escorts were unable to mount any serious attacks on the U-boats, and had to spend much of their time rescuing survivors.
