
CRETE - SAGITTARIO CONVOY 22 May 1941

North off Crete Island, Greece
CO Admiral E.L.S. King

Yesterday an Italian/German convoy on their way to Crete was completely wiped out by our Force D. But another Axis convoy seems to be on the way to Crete. Find and sink him! The German Luftwaffe will try everything to protect this convoy. Bear up, no enemy reinforcements may reach Crete by sea!

Sink 16 of 25 enemy MSU's, so let not more then 9 enemy MSU's reach the escape points. Further one of your MSU's have to survive the German air attacks. The cruiser HMS Calcutta is subject to your command. Congratulations!


THE STORY

Admiral Andrew Cunningham, was determined that no German troop transports should reach Crete. He sent Admiral King's Force C (three cruisers and four destroyers) into the Aegean through the Kaso Strait, to attack a second flotilla of transports escorted by the Italian torpedo boat Sagittario. The force sank a caïque separated from the main flotilla at 08:30, thus saving itself from an air attack that struck the cruiser HMS Naiad at this time. The German pilots were trying to avoid killing their own troops in the water. King's squadron, still under constant air attack and running short of anti-aircraft ammunition, steamed on toward Milos, sighting the Sagittario at 10:00. King made the "difficult" decision not to press the attack, despite his overpowering advantage, as a result of the shortage of ammunition and the severity of the air strikes. The transports were gallantly defended by a torpedo charge by the Sagittario, which also laid a smoke screen. Admiral King had succeeded, however, in forcing the Germans to abort this seaborne operation. During the search and withdrawal from the area, Force C suffered heavy losses to German bombers. Naiad was damaged by near misses and the cruiser HMS Carlisle was hit. Admiral Cunningham later criticised King's decisions, saying that the safest place during an air attack was amongst the flotilla of caiques.

Force C met up with Rear Admiral Rawling's Force A1 at the Kithera Channel where more air attacks inflicted damage on both forces. A bomb struck HMS Warspite and then the destroyer Greyhound was sunk. King sent HMS Kandahar and Kingston to pick up survivors while the cruisers Gloucester and Fiji provided anti-aircraft support. Their commander was, however, not aware of the shortage of anti-aircraft ammunition in Gloucester and Fiji, which were down to 18 and 30 percent, respectively, four hours before they were detached to support the destroyers. Gloucester was hit by several bombs at 15:50, several hours after being detached, and had to be left behind due to the intense air attacks. The ship was sunk with 22 officers and 700 ratings losing their lives.

The air attacks on Force A1 and Force C continued. Two bombs hit the battleship HMS Valiant (with Lieutenant Prince Philip of Greece on board) and later another hit the still detached Fiji, disabling her at 18:45. A Junkers 88 flown by Lieutenant Gerhard Brenner dropped three bombs on Fiji, sinking her at 20:15. Five hundred survivors were rescued by Kandahar and Kingston the same night. The Royal Navy lost two cruisers and a destroyer sunk, but had managed to force the invasion fleet to turn round. In total, Royal Navy AA gunners shot down 10 Luftwaffe aircraft and damaged 16 more, some of which crash-landed upon their return to base, on 21/22 May.
