
UPRISING IN SERBIA - 25 Aug 1941

North of Bela Crkva, Macva Region, Serbia
CO Commander Misa Pantic

Our time has come, Comrade! The uprising in Serbia is under way and we must dare the open struggle against the fascist occupiers. You will lead the attack to liberate the provincial capital Krupanj! But first we need the arms depots of the Gendarmerie in the surrounding villages and as many men as possible before we can dare to attack.

Take all VHs! Use awarded prestige to recruit new partisans.

Recommended Core:

5 x Partisan


THE STORY

Hitler believed that with occupation of Yugoslavia, the country was liquidated as independent state. The Kingdom of Yugoslavia was divided between Germany, Italy, Hungary and Bulgaria, while in the territory of present-day Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina was proclaimed Independent State of Croatia. Occupiers plundered possessions and took some 350,000 Yugoslav soldiers into captivity. The largest part of Serbia was organized into Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia and as such it was the only example of the military regime in occupied Europe. Germans chose Milan Acimovic for head of quisling Commissary Government.

Preparations for the uprising by the Communist Party began after the May consultation held in Zagreb on 4 May 1941. The Military Committee of the Provincial Committee of the Communist Party for Serbia was formed in mid-May. On 13 May 1941, Josip Broz Tito sent a message to the Comintern stating that the Yugoslav communists were preparing for an uprising that would commence when Germany attacked the Soviet Union. The Central Committee of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia arrived in Belgrade in late May, and this was of great importance for the development of the resistance. After their arrival, the Central Committee held conferences with local party officials.

Western Serbia was chosen for base of the uprising, due to forests and hilly terrain and due to its population who provided strong resistance to invading Austrian forces in World War One. First partisan and chetnik detachments were formed in Valjevo area.

For the beginning of the uprising is taken armed action of Radevina partisan detachment on 7 July 1941 in Bela Crkva near Krupanj. In Bela Crkva was held the traditional Ivanjdan midsummer village fair. There came a group of fifteen partisans, led by commander Misa Pantic and political commissar Zikica Jovanovic Spanac. Partisans gathered people and called them to join in fight against the German invaders. Speech was given by Pantic, a doctor from Valjevo, and Jovanovic, a journalist from Valjevo and combatant from Spanish Civil War. Gendarmes Bogdan Loncar and Milenko Brakovic tried to break up the gathering, forbidden under conditions of military occupation. The partisans opened fire and killed both gendarmes.

Eight weeks later after three days of fighting, Krupanj was liberated on September 3, 1941 by Valjevo partisan detachment and chetniks led by Orthodox priest Vlada Zecevic and lieutenant Ratko Martinovic. Zecevic, Martinovic and bulk of their chetniks later joined to partisans.
