
OPERATION ISTRIA - 25 Sep 1943

Vicinity of Petrinja, Central Croatia
CO Commander Koca Popovic

Italy has capitulated and in whole former Italian occupied territory of Yugoslavia rebellion have broken out! The Germans try to disarm the Italians and to gain control over these abandoned areas. Unfortunately the fascists has occupied the most important cities such as Trieste, Rijeka and Zadar before we could intervene. However, many new ad hoc Partisan units were formed and they besiege these cities now, but they are too weak and inexperienced to expel the Germans. Help our comrades in the liberation of our all homeland! But hurry, the reaction of the Germans will not long be stay out. They gather strong armored elite units and prepare a counterattack!

Take all VHs and hold it for 15 turns!

Numerous Italian military equipment has fallen into our hands, also some heavy weapons. It's time to motorize a part of your Corps and also to add some fast armored units.

Recommended Core:

2 x Guards, Trucks
2 x AB 41
1 x 105mm 105/28, Trucks

4 x Regular
2 x MG-Infantry, Mules
2 x 75mm 75/13, Mules


THE STORY

After capitulation of Italy in September 1943 open uprising begun in Slovenian littoral, Istria, Croatian Littoral, Gorski Kotar, Notranjsko and Dolenjsko with disarming of the Italian units and formation of large liberated territory and several new Partisan brigades as well as 18th, 30th and 31st Slovenian division of NOVJ. German communication line between Italy and Sava valley was cut or severally disrupted.

German 194th Grenadier Regiment managed to secure major ports of Trieste, Pula (Pola) on 13 September and Rijeka (Fiume) and Susak on 15 September before Partisans could move in, but both Pula and Rijeka become effectively surrounded with neither side able to do anything.

On 19 September German High command give order to commander of Army Group B, Field-Marshal Erwin Rommel to suppress uprising and eliminate NOV i POJ forces in Gorski Kotar, east Slovenia, Slovenian littoral, Istra, Croatian Littoral and secure Adriatic coast in that area.

Task was given to 2. SS Panzer Corps under Paul Hausser which massed huge force for the operation over 40000 soldiers, 95 tanks, 41 assault guns, 23 tank hunters, 6 heavy self-propelled guns and around 300 half-tracks versus around 15000 Partisans.

Such massive superiority in armor allowed Germans to quickly achieve their goals against Partisans who had only few captured Italian tankettes and anti-tank guns which makes entire operation waste of resources at the time when Germany was hard pressed on Eastern front and in southern Italy.
