
OPERATION TRIO - 10 May 1942

Foca, Srpska Region, Bosnia
CO Commander Koca Popovic

Italians, Croats and Chetniks have launched a large-scale operation against our liberated territory. We are surrounded by superior enemy forces and must retreat immediately. Cover the retreat of the 1st Proletarian Brigade, especially the Brigade HQ! 

Reach one of the Exit Points with your HQ MSU! 

Recommended Core:

6 x Regular
2 x MG-Infantry, Mules
2 x 75mm 75/13, Mules
1 x Light Cavalry

ATTENTION! In second and third turn, you will receive reinforcements in HQ! You will not be informed. You have to go to HQ in order to open the Deploy window. This bug is reported, but I do not know when it will be fixed.


THE STORY

During Operation Southeast Croatia, Josip Broz Tito, his Supreme Staff and the 1st Proletarian Brigade commanded by Spanish Civil War veteran Konstantin "Koca" Popovic, had withdrawn south to Foca, on the boundary between eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina. With the help of Montenegrin Partisans, they established a liberated area around Foca and Gorazde. This area, known as the "Foca Republic", was expanded by subsequent military operations. By late March, People's Liberation Councils had been established to govern 10 towns and 92 villages in the liberated area, but communist organisation in the area was limited and of poor quality.

Operation Trio was the first large-scale joint German-Italian counter-insurgency operation of World War II conducted in the Independent State of Croatia (NDH), which included modern-day Bosnia and Herzegovina. It was carried out in two phases within eastern Bosnia from 20 April to 13 May 1942, with Ustase militia and Croatian Home Guard forces taking part on the Axis side. The aim of the operation was to target all insurgents between Sarajevo and the Drina river in eastern Bosnia. These included groups led by communists and Serb-chauvinist Chetniks. Differentiating between the rank and file of the two insurgent factions was difficult, as even the communist-led insurgent groups consisted mainly of Serb peasants who had little understanding of the political aims of their leaders.

During Operation Trio, the Partisan leader Josip Broz Tito, his Supreme Staff and the Partisan main force, consisting of the 1st and 2nd Proletarian Brigades, withdrew from their base of operations around Foca. After briefly reorganising around Zelengora mountain south-east of Foca, they moved their operations to western Bosnia for the remainder of 1942.

