
OPERATION RATWEEK - 3 Sep 1944

West of Zagreb, Croatia
CO Commander Peko Dapcevic

This is a Hit & Run-operation! In recent days, the USAAF bombed all enemy airfields in Zagreb east of the Sava River. Your task is the capture and destruction of the remaining enemy airfields west of the Sava River! If all airfields are unusable, Zagreb is without fighter protection and the USAAF is able to bomb important factories and railway facilities without significant losses. Act quickly and retreat in time, before the enemy can react!

Find and destroy 5 of 5 enemy MSU's (Factories and trains in Zagreb) with your bombers (Reinforcement) and don't lose any of your own MSU bombers! To ensure this, all enemy airfields east of the Sava River must be destroyed by your ground forces, otherwise the Luftwaffe shoot down your bombers soon!

The time of hiding in the mountains is over! Now comes the time to fight the enemy in open field. The British have given us some modern heavy weapons, upgrade your Corps into a powerful full-motorized force, in order to perform your future tasks! A fighter squadron, trained and equipped by our British allies, is also subject to your command. Congratulations!

Recommended Core:

2 x Stuart V
6 x Guards, Trucks
2 x MG-Infantry, Trucks
2 x AEC III
3 x 105mm 105/28, Trucks
1 x Spitfire V


THE STORY

Simply refereed to by Partisan Supreme Headquarters as Destruction of communications on Yugoslav front from 1 to 7 September 1944, operation Ratweek was major joint effort of Allied air forces and Yugoslav partisans.

Plan probably originated from ULTRA decrypts revealing planed withdrawal of German Army from Adriatic coastline and Army Group E from Greece where over 350.000 German soldiers were used for occupation and coastal defense duties. Disrupting German withdrawal schedule would have serious consequences as subsequent events showed.

Agreement was made during talks between Josip Broz Tito, Winston Churchill and Henry Maitland Wilson from 6 to 14 August 1944 in Caserta and Naples. Goal was to destroy communication network (road and railway) in entire Yugoslavia simultaneously by using eight Partisan Corps (24 division and one operational group with 79 brigades, totaling 120.000 soldiers), four Partisan operational zone and units of regional staffs supported by Allied Balkan Air Force and 15th United States Army Air Force.
