
CASE WHITE - 30 Feb 1943

Vicinity of the Neretva River, Herzegovina
CO Commander Koca Popovic

After the hard fighting of the past days, the Fascists are still on our heels! We must retreat as quickly as possible to Montenegro and our only remaining option is to reach and cross the Neretva River. But the passage is only possible at one point! Scouts reported that Chetniks has occupied this area, so we have to fight our way. We are in real danger, but in any case, we will not leave our wounded comrades!

Cover the retreat of the Partisan hospital and High Command HQ! Reach one of the Exit Points and retreat 3 of 5 of your MSU's! So make sure, that you lost no more than two of your MSU's.

Recommended Core:

6 x Regular
2 x MG-Infantry, Mules
3 x 75mm 75/13, Mules
2 x Light Cavalry


THE STORY

Battle of the Neretva

During the battle, the Partisans were caught in a pocket with their backs to the Neretva river. On their western side, were German forces, including several elite units and supported by panzer brigades. The eastern side (opposite the Partisan pocket) was guarded only by Chetnik formations, who were acting in coordination with the Germans. To reach this side the Partisans would have to cross one or more of the five bridges on the Neretva river. If the Partisans could cross the river they would be relatively safe; however, they had insufficient time to cross as the Axis forces were preparing for their final push.

In order to counter this strategic "checkmate", the Partisan commander, Josip Broz Tito, prepared an elaborate deception. He ordered his sappers to actually blow up all the bridges on the river. When air reconnaissance brought this information to the German command, they concluded that the Partisans must be preparing a final dash north of their current position (along the western shore of the Neretva), and had blown up the bridge to prevent desertion as well as attack by Chetnik forces from the other side of the river. They thus began a redeployment of troops in the area to block the anticipated movement.

This redeployment gave the Partisan engineers precious time needed to sufficiently repair the bridge and to eliminate the Chetnik troops defending its far side. The Germans, characteristically, quickly caught on, but were unable to correct their mistake and prepare a serious attack in time, because of their previous redeployment orders. With their rearguard fighting off an increasingly powerful German advance, the Partisans crossed the river under intense air bombardment (the Axis deployed large Luftwaffe formations), but the mountainous landscape prevented accurate destruction of the makeshift bridge. After the escape was complete, the weak bridge was finally rendered useless to prevent pursuit. The humiliating strategic defeat was amplified by Tito being able to keep his well known pledge not to leave the wounded behind, as they faced certain execution at the hands of the Axis (which later actually happened in the aftermath of the Battle of the Sutjeska).
