
BELGRADE OFFENSIVE - 12 Oct 1944

West of Belgrade, Serbia
CO General Peko Dapcevic

The time has come to liberate the Serbian capital from the fascist bondage! With the support of the victorious Red Army, it should not be difficult to drive out the Germans and their collaborators. Long live our leader Comrade Tito, long live the Communist Party!

Take all VHs!

A fighter-bomber squadron, trained and equipped by our British allies, is subject to your command. Congratulations!

Recommended Core:

2 x Stuart V
6 x Guards, Trucks
2 x MG-Infantry, Trucks
2 x AEC III
3 x 105mm 105/28, Trucks
1 x Spitfire V
1 x Hurricane IV


THE STORY

The 4th Guards Mechanized Corps of the Red Army and the Yugoslav 12th Corps broke through the enemy resistance south of Belgrade on 14 October, approaching the city. The Yugoslavs advanced along the roads in the direction of Belgrade south of the Sava River, while the Red Army engaged in fighting on the northern bank outskirts. The assault on the city was delayed due to the diversion of forces for the elimination of thousands of enemy troops surrounded between Belgrade and Smederevo (to the south-east). On 20 October, Belgrade had been completely overrun by joint Soviet and Yugoslav forces.

The Yugoslav 13th Corps, in cooperation with the Bulgarian 2nd Army, advanced from the south-east. They were responsible for the area of Nis and Leskovac. The forces were also responsible for cutting off the main for the evacuation of Army Group E, along the rivers of South Morava and Morava. Army Group E had, therefore, been forced to retreat through the mountains of Montenegro and Bosnia and was unable to strengthen the German forces in Hungary.

The next day, elements of the 3rd Ukrainian Front stormed Kraljevo and finally cut Thessaloniki highway to Belgrade.

The Soviet 10th Guards Rifle Corps of the 46th Army (2nd Ukrainian Front), together with units of the Yugoslav Partisans moving via the Danube - provided more offensive strength from the north-east against the Wehrmacht's position in Belgrade. They cleared the left bank of the Tisa and Danube (in Yugoslavia) and took the town of Pancevo.
