
BATTLE OF SARAJEVO - 1 Apr 1945

Vicinity of Sarajevo, Bosnia
CO Commander Kosta Nad

The encirclement and destruction of the German-Croat forces in the area of Sarajevo is our next planned step. For this we need the motorized and armored units of your Elite-Corps. Advance in the rear of the enemy quickly at Podlugovi and cut the Germans off! The rest should like a walk in the park.

Take all VHs and prevent the escape of more then three enemy units via Exit Point!

Recommended Core:

1 x T-34/85
1 x Stuart V
6 x Guards, Trucks
2 x SU-85
2 x AEC III
3 x 152mm D-1, Trucks
1 x Spitfire V
1 x Hurricane IV


THE STORY

Surrounding actions of Yugoslav army from 28 March to 10 April 1945 for purpose of liberating Sarajevo and its wider area. Under command of Operative HQ for liberation of Sarajevo were 2nd, 3rd and 5th Corps of Yugoslav army, 11th and 13th Krajina and 18th Central Bosnian Brigade, Artillery Brigade and Tank Company. Sarajevo and surrounding areas was defended by strong German and NDH forces under command of German 21st Mountain Corps.

German defense plan of 22 February named Sarajevo as fortified city which could only be abandoned on permission from Adolf Hitler. This plan was stolen by Sarajevo operatives lead by Vladimir Peric Valter what caused mass arrests including 25 German and 150 NDH soldiers and suicide of LtColonel Vedel, German chief of staff, who kept it in a locked vault. By 20 March failure of German offensive in Hungary and opening offensive of Yugoslav 4th Army in Lika made holding Sarajevo pointless and retreat was ordered with 3000 wounded German soldiers from Sarajevo hospital going first.

Interception of Yugoslav wireless communications revealed to Germans that general attack was planed for 28 March and in order to secure their retreat routes several operations were planed and carried out BERGGEIST, MAIGEWITTER and OSTERGLOCKE.

After heavy fighting's Sarajevo was liberated on 6 April. During pursuit of enemy, units of JA liberated Visoko, Kakanj and 10 April Busovaca concluding Sarajevo operation.
