
BATTLE OF LAKE KHASAN - 2 AUG 1938

Lake Khasan, Far East of Soviet Union

The sneaky Japanese attacked and beaten our border troops on the Bezymyannaya and Zaozyornaya hills. Attack the Japanese with superior power and recapture the territories we deserve!

ORDERS
After 9 turns control 7/6/5 VHs for a BV/V/TV.

CORE (recommended)
2x Tank (+1)
2x Infantry (+2)
1x Reconnaissance
1x Artillery (+1)

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

STORY
The Battle of Lake Khasan (July 29, 1938 - August 11, 1938) and also known as the Changkufeng Incident was an attempted military incursion by Manchukuo (Japanese) into the territory claimed by the Soviet Union. This incursion was founded in the belief of the Japanese side that the Soviet Union misinterpreted the demarcation of the boundary based on the Treaty of Peking between Imperial Russia and the Qing Dynasty China (and subsequent supplementary agreements on demarcation), and furthermore, that the demarcation markers were tampered with.

On July 6, 1938 the Japanese Kwantung Army intercepted and decoded a message sent by the Russian commander in the Posyet region to Soviet headquarters in Khabarovsk. The message recommended that Russian soldiers be allowed to secure previously unoccupied high ground west of Lake Khasan, most notably the disputed Changkufeng Heights, because it would be advantageous for the Soviets to occupy terrain which overlooked the Korean port-city of Rajin, as well as strategic railways linking Korea to Manchuria. Within the next two weeks, small groups of Soviet border troops then moved into the area and began fortifying the mountain, constructing emplacements, observation trenches, entanglements, and communications facilities.

At first, the Japanese Korean Army, which had been assigned to defend the area, disregarded the Soviet advance. However, the Kwantung Army, whose administrative jurisdiction overlapped Changkufeng, pushed the Korean Army to take more action because it was suspicious of Soviet intentions. Following this, the Korean Army took the matter to Tokyo, recommending that a formal protest be sent to the USSR.

The conflict started on July 15, when the Japanese attaché in Moscow demanded the removal of Soviet border troops from the Changkufeng Hills to the west of Lake Khasan in the south of Primorye, not far from Vladivostok, claiming this territory by the Soviet-Korea border. The demand was rejected.

The Japanese 19th Division along with some Manchukuo units took on the Soviet 39th Rifle Corps under Grigori Shtern (eventually consisting of the 32nd, 39th, and 40th Rifle Divisions, as well as the 2nd Mechanised Brigade and two separate Tank battalions). One of the Japanese Army Commanders at the battle was Colonel Kotoku Sato, the commander of the 75th Infantry Regiment. Lieutenant General Suetaka Kamezo gave Sato an order: "You are to mete out a firm and thorough counterattack without fail, once you gather that the enemy is advancing even in the slightest". The hidden meaning of this was that Sato had been ordered to expel the Soviets from Changkufeng.

On Jul 31, Sato's regiment launched a night sortie on the fortified hill. In the Changkufeng sector, 1,114 Japanese engaged a Soviet garrison of 300, eliminating them and knocking out 10 tanks, while taking casualties of 34 killed and 99 wounded themselves. In the Shachofeng sector, 379 Japanese surprised and routed another 300 Soviet troops, while knocking out 7 tanks, and suffering 11 killed and 34 wounded in the process. After this, thousands more Japanese soldiers from the 19th division arrived, dug in, and requested reinforcements. High Command rejected the request, as they knew General Suetaka would use these forces to aggressively assault vulnerable Soviet positions, thus causing an unwanted escalation. The Japanese troops instead settled for defending the disputed area.

The Soviets gathered 354 tanks and assault guns at Lake Khasan by this time, including 257 T-26 tanks (with 10 KhT-26 flame-throwing tanks), 3 ST-26 bridge-laying tanks, 81 BT-7 light tanks, and 13 SU-5-2 self-propelled guns. On 31 July, People's Commissar for Defence Kliment Voroshilov ordered combat readiness for 1st Coastal Army; Pacific Fleet was mobilized as well.

The chief of the Far East Front, Vasily Blücher, arrived at the front line on August 2, 1938. Under his command additional forces were moved to the zone of conflict and from August 2-9 the Japanese forces at Changkufeng were subjected to very heavy attacks. Such was the disparity of forces that one Japanese artillery commander observed that the Soviets fired more shells in one day than the Japanese did in the entire two-week affair. Despite this, the Japanese defenders organized an effective anti-tank defense, with disastrous results for the poorly coordinated Soviets; the Soviet assaults were repeatedly beaten back with heavy casualties. Thousands of Soviet troops were killed or wounded, and at least 9 tanks were destroyed and 76 damaged to varying degrees.

Despite repelling the Soviet thrusts, it was clear that the local Japanese units would not be able to keep Changkufeng without widening the conflict. On August 10, Japanese ambassador Mamoru Shigemitsu asked for peace. Satisfied that the incident had been brought to an "honorable" conclusion on August 11, 1938, in 13 hours 30 minutes of local time the Japanese stopped fighting and Soviet forces reoccupied the heights.

