Herr General, your forces are smashed and your HQ captured, for you the war is over.

The Russian counter-offensive began on December 1st when 2 Panzer Army was attacked from all areas by what Guderian described as "hordes of Siberians". These troops from the 10th Army were indeed fresh reserves rushed from Siberia and released from the far east by the imminent entry of the USA into the war, Stalin's spy in Tokyo had informed him of a planned attack by Japan any day soon.The intention of the Soviet armies was to break through on the flanks of Army Group Center, surround as much of it as possible and cut it off. This catastrophic event completely changed the course of the war in 1941. It put the Wehrmacht into a state of panic. Here when they thought the enemy was beaten down, an entirely new fresh force, larger than theirs, was swooping in upon them. They seemed like ghosts in the blinding winter whiteness and came from everywhere. They were seemingly oblivious to the cold, disregarding death and with a vengeance as frigid as the air they were breathing.By the 2nd of December Guderian was forced to go over to the defensive and on the 6th, pressed by the Russian 10th and 50th Armies and the 1st Guards Cavalry Corps he began to withdraw towards the Shat and Don Rivers.

On December 20 Guderian visited Hitler requesting that the line be withdrawn to better positions.Hitler refused on the grounds that any retreat would lead to general panic.Guderian forced the issue,saying: 'Positional warfare in this unsuitable terrain will lead to battles of material as in WWI.We shall lose the flower of our officer and N.C.O. corps.We shall suffer huge losses without gaining any advantage and these losses will be irreplaceable,there seems no justification for sacrificing my soldiers lives.' Hitler replied: 'I know all about your personal effort and how you lead your troops from in front but for this reason you are in danger of seeing things too much at close quarters.You are hamstrung by too much compassion for your men.Things look clearer from a greater distance.In order to hold the front no sacrifice can be too great.For if we do not hold it then Army Group Center will be lost.' On December 24 von Kluge accused Guderian of evacuating Chern without authority,creating a dangerous gap of twenty-five miles.Hitler dismissed him from his command,already angered at the talk of withdrawal.Furious at Guderian's comments about him von Kluge challenged him to a duel which Hitler forbade. Guderian went on to become Inspector-General of the Armoured Troops and later Chief of Staff of the Army. After the war he spent 3 years in US custody and died in 1954 aged 65, his son Heinz became a prominent General in the post-war German Bundeswehr and NATO.

So ends the campaign, thanks for playing.