AIRCRAFTS

The Russians are counterattacking!! You must defeat them and then take their Victory Hex. You have air support, with one fighter, one recon plane and two bombers. Especially the Ju 87G-1 bomber is suitable to fight enemy tanks!
Aircraft have in most Efiles, beside ammunition, also a limited amount of fuel. Make sure that enough fuel is available to reach the nearest own airfield. Aircraft can resupply only at own airfields!

Fighter Class (FTR)
Fighter class units represent air superiority combat aircraft whose primary task is to destroy enemy aircraft or prevent enemy aircraft from carrying out their mission. They are expensive, and not very effective at attacking enemy ground units, (although they can damage ATY units and other ground units with low air defense values) but necessary to win the battle for air superiority in a given scenario.
They act as escorts for friendly TB units, attacking any enemy FTR unit who attacks a friendly TB unit adjacent to the friendly FTR unit in question. This escort attack comes before the enemy FTR unit can attack the friendly TB unit, but FTR units only attack as escorts once per turn. They also attack enemy TB units attacking a friendly ground unit that is adjacent to the friendly FTR unit in question. Again, this attack takes place before the enemy TB unit gets a chance to attack your ground unit, and the FTR unit can only conduct such an attack once per turn. A good way of looking at FTR units and air superiority is this - they cannot win a battle for you, but it is hard to win one without FTR units and the air superiority they give you when they are victorious. They are good at destroying enemy FTR and TB units, and protecting your TB units from enemy FTR units, as well as protecting your ground units from attack by enemy TB units. However, they are expensive, so use them wisely.

Tactical Bomber Class (TB)
Tactical bomber class units represent light bombers, medium bombers, fighter bombers, dive bombers, recon planes and specialised ground attack aircraft whose primary task is to destroy enemy ground units from the air. They are usually armed with machine guns (.303 calibre to .50 calibre) and cannon (anywhere from 15mm to 75mm), bombs, and occasionally air to ground rockets. They function as artillery that can be anywhere on the battlefield. This allows them to attack units far behind the front line, which would normally be safe from any other type of unit. In the early years of the war they are often the only units that can affect the heavier TK units, as well. As the war progresses, TB units that specialise in killing enemy tanks become available.
Most TB class units are a great asset in both attack and defense. TB units are even more expensive than FTR units, and are a favoured target for enemy FTR and AD units. Used correctly and covered by friendly FTR units, they can have a dramatic effect on the outcome of a battle.
