INFANTRY, ARTILLERY AND RECONS

In this scenario, you act with infantry, artillery and recons. You must take the Soviet VH (Victory Hex) to win. Make sure that your own VH is not captured by the enemy! You have the help of one auxiliary artillery unit. The other units are your core units, keeping for the duration of the campaign.

Artillery Class (ATY)
Artillery class units represent towed and self-propelled guns which are equipped and organised to provide support for the other combat arms. They are all able to attack units from at least two hexes away. ATY units also have two special abilities that make them very powerful. The first is called Close Support Fire. This ability allows ATY units to fire at any enemy ground unit attacking any friendly ground unit that is adjacent to the ATY unit in question. This means that attacking units can be hit by suppression and kill results before they attack the targeted unit. The second special ability is called Support Fire. This allows an ATY unit to fire at any enemy ground unit conducting an attack within range of the ATY unit in question. As with Close Support Fire, this attack takes place before the enemy ground unit conducts its attack. Self-propelled ATY units are some of the most powerful units. They are usually armoured, which gives them a large advant age in an artillery duel with towed ATY units. They can also move with units that have broken through enemy lines and immediately provide fire against a counterattacking enemy. Self-propelled ATY units are expensive, but well worth their high cost if used correctly. You almost always need some type of artillery support to launch a successful attack, and ATY units are very effective in a defensive role as well.

Infantry Class (INF)
Infantry class units represent infantry units, armed with infantry weapons (rifles, submachine guns, etc.), heavy weapons (machine guns, 50mm to 120mm mortars, light AT weapons, etc.), a small number of supporting AT guns, and in some cases special assault weapons (demolition charges, etc.) and even bridging equipment. There are many types of units that can perform certain tasks better than infantry units, but none of them can replace infantry units in their primary job - capturing and holding ground. You need INF units to hold urban, forested, and rough terrain areas against enemy infantry, and you also usually need INF units to capture urban, forested, and rough terrain areas from the enemy. INF units are very inexpensive to maintain compared to other types of units, and experienced INF units win battles for you where other types of units cannot. However, INF units must be used with some thought or they are quickly destroyed or worn down to the point that they cannot accomplish anything. Avoid having your INF units fight unsupported against TK and ATY units on open ground. Even on open ground, they can defend against nearly any type of unit if supported by good ATY and AT units and protected from air attack by AD units if need be.

Recon Class (RCN)
Recon class units represent light mechanised units whose primary task is to scout the battlefield, infiltrate enemy lines, and harass enemy lines of supply and the enemy’s rear areas. They are equipped with armoured cars, and usually have small infantry units in half-tracks or trucks in their formations as well. They all have a very good spotting range, and may break up their movement into segments. If properly taken advantage of, this phased movement allows RCN units to expose enemy positions before launching an attack. RCN units were expected to avoid heavy fighting. Their job was to exploit breakthroughs and scout ahead of attacking forces. To represent this, RCN units usually retreat from combat with a superior enemy, trading ground for losses.
