Libyan Expedition

Part 1/3 of the "In der Wueste und auf Kreta" minicampaign


"Willkommen in Libyen, General Bistroff! Holen Sie sich in mein Auto, bitte, und lass mich informieren Sie uber die Situation.

Our Italian allies have undergone several defeats during last weeks and there's a danger of their complete failure. I think that I don't need to overly emphasize the importance of a secure southern flank for our upcoming campaign. Moreover, if the Brits gain total control of North Africa and Mediterranean basin, their supply lines will improve drastically and we may start negotia... I mean, the final victory of our arms will be delayed a bit.

Herr General, there's not much that OKH can offer us, but we all know that your brigade was seriously depleted during the previous campaigns. For now it'll be strengthened by a company of flamethrower tanks and your anti-aircraft artillery section will be reinforced too. I know that it's not enough, but we believe that your skills and experience will compensate the lack of men and equipment.

Your first task is an attack... Neumann, geben Sie uns Karten, bitte... in this sector. Commonwealth forces consist of two tank battalions with appropriate support. Their camps are here and here. Every time the Italians tried to enter the region, the Brits counterattacked and routed them with little effort. I pity the Italians, they are courageous and skilled, but their vintage tanks are museum pieces and can't do much against phenomenal British armour. Especially when Brits have air dominance over the battlefield.

Once colonnello Mammoliti comes we can take a look at details..."


Victory condition: Capture both VHs.

Hint: As you have realized during the Western campaign, Allied tanks are very powerful, same as their planes. Thankfully we got an answer for both - packed in one weapon...
Oh, and we're sending in some auxiliary planes, too! But don't expect wonders...

Core reinforces (3/3): As you already know, you'll be given several tanks and 88mm flak cannons, but you'll be also awarded a "choice unit" depending on a result of the previous scenario. 