Counterstrike at Orel


Part 1/4 of the "Zurueck in USSR" minicampaign


"Well, they say that he experienced heavy trauma. From what I've heard it looks like he was wounded into head and had fallen unconscius for a while. Then he woke up, the battle still raged and there were some Falschirmjaegern fighting by their side. He underwent shunt, thought that he's back on Crete and for some reason sent all the paratroopers away. To no surprise, the positions were no longer defendable once they've retreated and it was obvious that they all would die, but now he's recuperated and in a masterpiece of defensive combat withstood all the attacks and held the positions for several hours, until they all could withdraw. When the brigade reached Tunis, he was immed... oh, there he comes! Silence!

Herr Generalmajor! We all hope and believe that this will be the one last lightning strike that ends the war. Don't disappoint us!

Herr Generalmajor, seems like the Soviets already knew what's happening and there are signs that they prepared a local offensive action to disrupt our concentration. The elements of 512th infantry division hold the base of your entrance area. You'll move into the postions at midnight and we hope that you'll spend the whole day in cover, preparing for the attack. But if the Soviets really try to disturb your line... well, you know what to do."



Victory conditions: Capture all VHs.

Hint: Our lines copy the terrain and are quite solid, but the lack of personnel makes them very vulnerable to concentrated attack of armoured units. Russian command knowing of this fact have sent the whole tank division to break the line and mar the preparations for our upcomimg operation. They are concentrated in the NW. You must not only stop the Soviets, but drive them away totally.
Unfortunately there are no reinforces available.

Hint 2: Watch out for any unusual circumstances and use them to your advantage! There are roaming enemy fast units (mostly the cavalry and light tanks) securing the enemy rear, don't run into them.