Batalla de Teruel

15 de Diciembre de 1937

A pesar de los esfuerzos realizados, las operaciones de los meses pasados no alcanzaron sus objetivos primarios, el frente Norte ha caido, y la ofensiva rebelde sobre el Levante se acerca cada vez mas a Valencia (capital de la Republica provisionalmente). Para ayudarse en su avance hacia el Mediterraneo, el enemigo cuenta con la estrategica posicion de Teruel, que capturo tiempo atras. Esta posicion constituye un enorme peligro para Levante, por lo que no podemos permitir que continue en manos rebeldes.
La ofensiva que lanzaremos consiste en otro ataque envolvente que acabara rapidamente con la guarnicion enemiga, pero de por sentado que recibiremos un duro contraataque seguidamente. Las condiciones climatologicas este invierno estan siendo especialmente duras... los -28 grados que hace ahi fuera seran un problema mas.

Buena suerte.

Batalla de Teruel

December 15th, 1937

Althought we have made valiant efforts to change the tactical and strategic situation, recent operations have not achieved the High Command's goals. The Northern front has fallen, and the rebel offensive over the Levante is approaching the Republic's provisional capital in Valencia. Now, the enemy has an important base to aid his advance on the Mediterranean Sea, Teruel. The enemy base at Teruel is a great danger for the whole Levante area. We cannot allow the enemy to continue holding Teruel, if we are to save the Republic!

The planned offensive consist of a concentrated attack on Teruel, in order to quickly finish the rebel garrison defending Teruel. The rebels are commanded by Colonel Rey D'Harcourt, a clever opponent. The High Command thinks the fascists will send a huge number of reinforcements as soon as our troops appear at Teruel, so drive your troops quickly to the objectives and be careful to secure your flanks... Reinforcements of the V Army Corps will arrive to help you.

Ah, one more thing... as you surely already know it's minus 28 degrees (-18 Fahrenheit) and the snow will be another enemy to face for El Ejercito Popular...

Buena suerte. 